ARD
HORSETAILS
2 Rattlesnake fern
3
Botrychium virginianum
family Ophioglossaceae
QUICK CHECK: Shin-high to smaller fern with deepty out Heshy
fronds; a grape-cluster-like strue ture rises above the blade an
ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Small fern not spreading by rhizome. Stipe (stem) erer but often
single, fleshy, pinkish near the base, roughly D-shaped in cross sec tion but with no curvy sharn
corners, the surface smooth, hairless, 4-9" (10-23 tall before dividing. Frond der iduous
line, 4-12" (10-30 long and about equally wide, 2-3 times compound; ternately divided at triangular :he arount
of these divisions pinnately divided once or twice, the divisions sessile. The ultimate divisions pinnutes have
lanceolate, creased upward along the midvein when young, deeply lobed, the lobes overlapping and iffled
their margins toothed. Rachis branches are narrowly winged and have a raised center ridge rather than non
nel. Blades are hairless except that long, very fine and soft hairs may lay sparsely on the surface They 113
fleshy and thick, glossy, light green, held almost horizontally or slightly ascending. Sporophore like 11,00
cluster) held 6-14" (15-36 cm) above the frond on an erect stalk arising just below the first frond division he
surface with scattered, long, appressed woolly hairs and 2 small ridges. The stalk of the sporophore n
or longer than the spore-bearing part, which is branched pinnately 2 or 3 times, the smallest branc hes 0641 100
tiny, globular, yellow, spore-releasing structures that wither by early summer. The early sporophore In be
shoot stage resembles the rattle of a rattlesnake. The sporophore is not found on all individuals and may
absent at the best young stage for eating.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Other grape ferns (genus Botrychium, edibility mostly unknown) have the perophor
stalk attached at or near the base, or have smaller, narrower, and less divided fronds.
HABITAT: Deciduous forests of all types with rich soil and moderate moisture levels. Sometimes
forests, swamps, or openings in conifer forests. Native.
FOOD USE: Fronds as a cooked green. Best in spring when very tender, but unlike most ferns the fromus
remain relatively tender through the summer and can be eaten even in autumn after they have been tour hed
with frost, which turns them reddish brown and sweetens them slightly. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This species is native to North America, South America, Europe, and Asia. It is wide'y eaten 15
a traditional potherb in the Himalayas. Intere shegly
although it is common and incredibly wide sor sad
in North America, I have not found ethnoge aphil
reports of its food use here AKA g' ipe terr
Botrypus virginianus.
ARD HORSETAILS 2 Rattlesnake fern 3 Botrychium virginianum family Ophioglossaceae QUICK CHECK: Shin-high to smaller fern with deepty out Heshy fronds; a grape-cluster-like strue ture rises above the blade an ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Small fern not spreading by rhizome. Stipe (stem) erer but often single, fleshy, pinkish near the base, roughly D-shaped in cross sec tion but with no curvy sharn corners, the surface smooth, hairless, 4-9" (10-23 tall before dividing. Frond der iduous line, 4-12" (10-30 long and about equally wide, 2-3 times compound; ternately divided at triangular :he arount of these divisions pinnately divided once or twice, the divisions sessile. The ultimate divisions pinnutes have lanceolate, creased upward along the midvein when young, deeply lobed, the lobes overlapping and iffled their margins toothed. Rachis branches are narrowly winged and have a raised center ridge rather than non nel. Blades are hairless except that long, very fine and soft hairs may lay sparsely on the surface They 113 fleshy and thick, glossy, light green, held almost horizontally or slightly ascending. Sporophore like 11,00 cluster) held 6-14" (15-36 cm) above the frond on an erect stalk arising just below the first frond division he surface with scattered, long, appressed woolly hairs and 2 small ridges. The stalk of the sporophore n or longer than the spore-bearing part, which is branched pinnately 2 or 3 times, the smallest branc hes 0641 100 tiny, globular, yellow, spore-releasing structures that wither by early summer. The early sporophore In be shoot stage resembles the rattle of a rattlesnake. The sporophore is not found on all individuals and may absent at the best young stage for eating. CONFUSING PLANTS: Other grape ferns (genus Botrychium, edibility mostly unknown) have the perophor stalk attached at or near the base, or have smaller, narrower, and less divided fronds. HABITAT: Deciduous forests of all types with rich soil and moderate moisture levels. Sometimes forests, swamps, or openings in conifer forests. Native. FOOD USE: Fronds as a cooked green. Best in spring when very tender, but unlike most ferns the fromus remain relatively tender through the summer and can be eaten even in autumn after they have been tour hed with frost, which turns them reddish brown and sweetens them slightly. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This species is native to North America, South America, Europe, and Asia. It is wide'y eaten 15 a traditional potherb in the Himalayas. Intere shegly although it is common and incredibly wide sor sad in North America, I have not found ethnoge aphil reports of its food use here AKA g' ipe terr Botrypus virginianus. 