Field horsetail
family Equisetaceae
Equisetum arvense
unbranched, tan fertile stem with sheaths of dark branches. scales
and QUICK a cone-like CHECK: tip: Short, vegetative soft, stems green with whorls of ascending simple
ID difficulty 1. perennial forming colonies by rhizome, the stems vegetative. growing Vegetative singly or
occasionally DESCRIPTION: to 22" (56 clumped. cm) A tall, There erect, are columnar, two kinds nearly of stem: uniform fertile in thickness, and ring of smaller the surface hollow green channels. and finely Nodes ridged. at short In
cross stems section the center has sheaths a small cut hollow, into sharp surrounded teeth that by are a dark with a light few margins. sharp teeth Upper at each nodes joint. produce Limbs
whorls of 9-12 long, and greatly thin, simple, overlap slightly those above them. Fertile stems 6-10" (15-25 at cm) this time; tall, they emerge later.)
intervals. with appressed zigzag, ridged, jointed limbs with appearing for only a
are ascending back. (The vegetative stems will not be visible hollow, without
short time in spring are tan before or pinkish dying with fine vertical ridges, juicy and soft, slightly translucent, teeth. Each stem
Fertile stems Sheaths at the nodes are appressed and split halfway to the base, forming sharp Before opening, the
branches nodes 1.2-3" (3-8 cm) apart. Cone 1-1.5" (2.5-3.5 cm) long, single, at the apex. asterisk in the center of
a cone pinkish composed mica-like surface; after opening they look like whorls of miniature mushrooms on upcurved
has 4-6 IS of numerous flat-topped, glossy pentagons or hexagons with an stalks.
HABITAT: Sunny to somewhat shady moist soil, especially where sandy and disturbed; forest edges, meadows,
roadsides. low areas and wetland margins. Native.
FOOD USE: Pick the young, fertile stems before or during release of spores, while stems are still tender and
juicy. Bite off the sections between the nodes, discarding the bitter nodes along with their scaly sheaths.
(Some people cook them whole with the scales attached.) This plant also produces tiny edible tubers on thin
rhizomes but these are too small and scattered to warrant collecting. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is
really just a nibble, but
certainly a fun and pleas-
ant one that is widely
available in spring.
RELATED EDIBLES:
Meadow horsetail
E. pratense has similar
(although slightly taller)
fertile stems that are
nearly as good to eat, but
they are not as abundant.
After releasing spores
they turn green, toughen,
and grow branches, but
these branches are fewer
and thinner than those of
field horsetail and spread-
ing rather than ascend-
ing, The fertile stems
of woodland horsetail
E. sylvaticum also turn
green and toughen after
releasing spores, growing
branches that divide into
many fine branchlets. Its
young stems are not as
good or tender as those
referdle (vegelative) Jum
Fertile shoot.
of field horsetail.
32
Field horsetail family Equisetaceae Equisetum arvense unbranched, tan fertile stem with sheaths of dark branches. scales and QUICK a cone-like CHECK: tip: Short, vegetative soft, stems green with whorls of ascending simple ID difficulty 1. perennial forming colonies by rhizome, the stems vegetative. growing Vegetative singly or occasionally DESCRIPTION: to 22" (56 clumped. cm) A tall, There erect, are columnar, two kinds nearly of stem: uniform fertile in thickness, and ring of smaller the surface hollow green channels. and finely Nodes ridged. at short In cross stems section the center has sheaths a small cut hollow, into sharp surrounded teeth that by are a dark with a light few margins. sharp teeth Upper at each nodes joint. produce Limbs whorls of 9-12 long, and greatly thin, simple, overlap slightly those above them. Fertile stems 6-10" (15-25 at cm) this time; tall, they emerge later.) intervals. with appressed zigzag, ridged, jointed limbs with appearing for only a are ascending back. (The vegetative stems will not be visible hollow, without short time in spring are tan before or pinkish dying with fine vertical ridges, juicy and soft, slightly translucent, teeth. Each stem Fertile stems Sheaths at the nodes are appressed and split halfway to the base, forming sharp Before opening, the branches nodes 1.2-3" (3-8 cm) apart. Cone 1-1.5" (2.5-3.5 cm) long, single, at the apex. asterisk in the center of a cone pinkish composed mica-like surface; after opening they look like whorls of miniature mushrooms on upcurved has 4-6 IS of numerous flat-topped, glossy pentagons or hexagons with an stalks. HABITAT: Sunny to somewhat shady moist soil, especially where sandy and disturbed; forest edges, meadows, roadsides. low areas and wetland margins. Native. FOOD USE: Pick the young, fertile stems before or during release of spores, while stems are still tender and juicy. Bite off the sections between the nodes, discarding the bitter nodes along with their scaly sheaths. (Some people cook them whole with the scales attached.) This plant also produces tiny edible tubers on thin rhizomes but these are too small and scattered to warrant collecting. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is really just a nibble, but certainly a fun and pleas- ant one that is widely available in spring. RELATED EDIBLES: Meadow horsetail E. pratense has similar (although slightly taller) fertile stems that are nearly as good to eat, but they are not as abundant. After releasing spores they turn green, toughen, and grow branches, but these branches are fewer and thinner than those of field horsetail and spread- ing rather than ascend- ing, The fertile stems of woodland horsetail E. sylvaticum also turn green and toughen after releasing spores, growing branches that divide into many fine branchlets. Its young stems are not as good or tender as those referdle (vegelative) Jum Fertile shoot. of field horsetail. 32 