1
3
Pteridium aquilinum 2 family Dennstaedtiaceae
Bracken fern
QUICK CHECK: Large fern with a triangular frond atop a single, long, straight, vertical
stalk ID 1. of dry, open country forming extensive thick colonies the by erect rhi-
difficulty
DESCRIPTION: Perennial fern almond-extract odor. Rhizome about as starch as mixed with
stalk, zome. black Rarely dark on fibers. it the has outside Stipe a strong (stem) with hair-like single, straight, roots; the erect, inside becoming finely has hairy whitish shallowly outside channeled and slimy higher inside, up; 5-10 it rises mm thick, about
coarse roughly D-shaped with gentle corners Fiddleheads near the base, (croziers) short-woolly with some distinct longer, dark rusty spots hairs, where the
top half drooping the frond's or height curling before and each splitting. of the evident 3 main branches on fiddleheads coiled but separately. fading with There age. are These 2 exude liquid eaten cm) by
the frond first forks, protect the bracken from herbivorous insects. Fronds 2-6' (60-180 are main
ants, which blade help held about 45° to the ground, roughly triangular in shape. There Proximal 3
high, the each twice pinnately compound. Rachises have a small channel on top. and are
branches, are on short stalks but distal ones are sessile. Pinnules taper to a narrow alternating tip
pinnules pinnately lobed, the lobes cut fully to the midrib, but broadly attached and margins
deeply the pinnule blade is zigzag-continuous. Lobes are blunt and mostly entire, the
slightly so downcurved with a light-colored halo beneath where the spores are produced.
HABITAT: Dry, mostly poor, often acidic soil in full to partial sun: abandoned fields and
pastures, roadsides, young or open woods, barrens, forest edges-especially where there
is a long-term history of fire. Common under aspen, pine, and white birch. Native.
FOOD USE: Fiddleheads, collected in spring and early summer, should only be consumed
well-cooked; they are carcinogenic when raw. In Asia they are commonly boiled, salted,
and dried, then used later in soups or noodle dishes. Rhizomes are found 2-8" (5-20 cm)
deep and should be cleaned, roasted, and peeled when the tops are dormant; after this the
starch can be chewed out of the fibers, but it's only worth the time on the largest plants.
Conservation 1/2.
COMMENTS: This is one of the most widespread plants on Earth and is probably the most
abundant wild edible in North America. Many sources will tell you that bracken fern is deadly
and should never be consumed
(see warning below); such state-
ments are deeply ethnocentric.
This remains an everyday food
item for hundreds of millions of
were
people and can easily be pur-
the
chased. Its traditional use as food
is extensively documented from
many regions. Nevertheless, any
consumer should rationally con-
sider what is known about its
chemistry.
WARNING: Always cook
thoroughly! Raw bracken fern
fiddleheads contain the chemi-
cal ptaquiloside and have been
shown to be potently carcino-
genic. Both drying and boiling greatly reduce the content of this
carcinogen, but do not fully eliminate it. Some populations have
been found to contain no ptaquiloside, and this chemical is also
absent from the roots. You may also want to avoid the occasional
colonies with almond odor. Mature stems contain ribbon-like
structures that can lacerate your hands if you pull on them.
34
1 3 Pteridium aquilinum 2 family Dennstaedtiaceae Bracken fern QUICK CHECK: Large fern with a triangular frond atop a single, long, straight, vertical stalk ID 1. of dry, open country forming extensive thick colonies the by erect rhi- difficulty DESCRIPTION: Perennial fern almond-extract odor. Rhizome about as starch as mixed with stalk, zome. black Rarely dark on fibers. it the has outside Stipe a strong (stem) with hair-like single, straight, roots; the erect, inside becoming finely has hairy whitish shallowly outside channeled and slimy higher inside, up; 5-10 it rises mm thick, about coarse roughly D-shaped with gentle corners Fiddleheads near the base, (croziers) short-woolly with some distinct longer, dark rusty spots hairs, where the top half drooping the frond's or height curling before and each splitting. of the evident 3 main branches on fiddleheads coiled but separately. fading with There age. are These 2 exude liquid eaten cm) by the frond first forks, protect the bracken from herbivorous insects. Fronds 2-6' (60-180 are main ants, which blade help held about 45° to the ground, roughly triangular in shape. There Proximal 3 high, the each twice pinnately compound. Rachises have a small channel on top. and are branches, are on short stalks but distal ones are sessile. Pinnules taper to a narrow alternating tip pinnules pinnately lobed, the lobes cut fully to the midrib, but broadly attached and margins deeply the pinnule blade is zigzag-continuous. Lobes are blunt and mostly entire, the slightly so downcurved with a light-colored halo beneath where the spores are produced. HABITAT: Dry, mostly poor, often acidic soil in full to partial sun: abandoned fields and pastures, roadsides, young or open woods, barrens, forest edges-especially where there is a long-term history of fire. Common under aspen, pine, and white birch. Native. FOOD USE: Fiddleheads, collected in spring and early summer, should only be consumed well-cooked; they are carcinogenic when raw. In Asia they are commonly boiled, salted, and dried, then used later in soups or noodle dishes. Rhizomes are found 2-8" (5-20 cm) deep and should be cleaned, roasted, and peeled when the tops are dormant; after this the starch can be chewed out of the fibers, but it's only worth the time on the largest plants. Conservation 1/2. COMMENTS: This is one of the most widespread plants on Earth and is probably the most abundant wild edible in North America. Many sources will tell you that bracken fern is deadly and should never be consumed (see warning below); such state- ments are deeply ethnocentric. This remains an everyday food item for hundreds of millions of were people and can easily be pur- the chased. Its traditional use as food is extensively documented from many regions. Nevertheless, any consumer should rationally con- sider what is known about its chemistry. WARNING: Always cook thoroughly! Raw bracken fern fiddleheads contain the chemi- cal ptaquiloside and have been shown to be potently carcino- genic. Both drying and boiling greatly reduce the content of this carcinogen, but do not fully eliminate it. Some populations have been found to contain no ptaquiloside, and this chemical is also absent from the roots. You may also want to avoid the occasional colonies with almond odor. Mature stems contain ribbon-like structures that can lacerate your hands if you pull on them. 34 