4
Florida coontie
Zamia floridana Zamiaceae (Cycad family)
QUICK entire, blunt CHECK: Fern-like leaves in dense clumps, pinnately one e compound with long
leaflets; confined to Florida. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: and Perennial evergreen growing from a thick, semi-woody base. Base
stump-like, woolly, covered with old hairy petiole bases and scales. Leaves rounded form
tuft at the top of this base, emerging coiled like a fiddlehead, having rusty hairs that a
soon slough off. Leaves are evergreen and last 2-3 years. Each is pinnately once compound, to ? "
usually arching, the numerous leaflets almost uniformly sized and spaced. Petiole (rachis) is nearly m) round. long,
finely hairy-scaly near the base, naked in the lower 40%, brown to green, not glossy. Leaflets sessile. yellow
ish at the narrowed base, broadly linear, entire, 3-5" (8-13 cm) long, downcurved rather than flat Veins are
numerous and parallel. Flowers (late summer) male and female on different plants, both kinds unshowy, in A
club-shaped structure, the cone-like tip covered in densely packed hexagonal scales. Fruit 0.8 2 (m) or g
with 5 flat sides, many packed onto a large cone, each consisting of one large seed coated with orange flesa,
HABITAT: Well-drained sandy soils in full or partial sun, especially over limestone, Forest edges, open woods,
abandoned fields, coastal ridges. Native.
FOOD USE: The enormous underground storage organ was once processed on a large scale to extract bland.
edible starch, through a detailed process of shredding or pounding, straining, rinsing, fermenting, and drying
I have not eaten this part. Anyone wanting to do this today needs to make sure to obtain the coontie legally
(from cultivated plants) and to process the starch so as to render it safe. WARNING: Coontie starch
toxic before appropriate processing. The ripe fruits are widely considered toxic, although I was introduced
to this fruit by a Florida woodsman who called it "the Florida Jolly Rancher." They have a hint of that flavor
but are not nearly as sweet, and at this time I'm not comfortable recommending their consumption, although
they appear not to be acutely toxic in small quantities. Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: The root of this species is not legal to collect from the wild in Florida and is included here only
for emergency use or historical interest. This was once a staple food for many people in Florida. Populations
were carefully and sustainably managed for thousands of years, but a few decades after European settlers
built factories to extract the starch commercially, these old-growth stands were decimated (a real-world
analogue to the truffula trees in Dr. Seuss's classic The Lorax). Fort Lauderdale was first establisned to protect
white starch harvesters from the attacks of Seminoles defending their livelihoods.
35
4 Florida coontie Zamia floridana Zamiaceae (Cycad family) QUICK entire, blunt CHECK: Fern-like leaves in dense clumps, pinnately one e compound with long leaflets; confined to Florida. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: and Perennial evergreen growing from a thick, semi-woody base. Base stump-like, woolly, covered with old hairy petiole bases and scales. Leaves rounded form tuft at the top of this base, emerging coiled like a fiddlehead, having rusty hairs that a soon slough off. Leaves are evergreen and last 2-3 years. Each is pinnately once compound, to ? " usually arching, the numerous leaflets almost uniformly sized and spaced. Petiole (rachis) is nearly m) round. long, finely hairy-scaly near the base, naked in the lower 40%, brown to green, not glossy. Leaflets sessile. yellow ish at the narrowed base, broadly linear, entire, 3-5" (8-13 cm) long, downcurved rather than flat Veins are numerous and parallel. Flowers (late summer) male and female on different plants, both kinds unshowy, in A club-shaped structure, the cone-like tip covered in densely packed hexagonal scales. Fruit 0.8 2 (m) or g with 5 flat sides, many packed onto a large cone, each consisting of one large seed coated with orange flesa, HABITAT: Well-drained sandy soils in full or partial sun, especially over limestone, Forest edges, open woods, abandoned fields, coastal ridges. Native. FOOD USE: The enormous underground storage organ was once processed on a large scale to extract bland. edible starch, through a detailed process of shredding or pounding, straining, rinsing, fermenting, and drying I have not eaten this part. Anyone wanting to do this today needs to make sure to obtain the coontie legally (from cultivated plants) and to process the starch so as to render it safe. WARNING: Coontie starch toxic before appropriate processing. The ripe fruits are widely considered toxic, although I was introduced to this fruit by a Florida woodsman who called it "the Florida Jolly Rancher." They have a hint of that flavor but are not nearly as sweet, and at this time I'm not comfortable recommending their consumption, although they appear not to be acutely toxic in small quantities. Conservation 3. COMMENTS: The root of this species is not legal to collect from the wild in Florida and is included here only for emergency use or historical interest. This was once a staple food for many people in Florida. Populations were carefully and sustainably managed for thousands of years, but a few decades after European settlers built factories to extract the starch commercially, these old-growth stands were decimated (a real-world analogue to the truffula trees in Dr. Seuss's classic The Lorax). Fort Lauderdale was first establisned to protect white starch harvesters from the attacks of Seminoles defending their livelihoods. 35 