6
Ostrich fern
3 UI FH-78
Matteucia struthiopteris
family Onocleaceae
QUICK the CHECK: of Fronds in a funnel-like rosette, with a deep " shaped
length the stem; spore fronds separate, dark, stiff, persistent ID gramm difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Spreads by thin rhizomes, often to form large colonies. The base
a dark-brown, scaly pedestal or tussock up to 10" (25 cm) high. Rachis/stipe becomes
deeper than wide, with a deep, U-shaped channel (like the groove in a celery stalk) straight,
the entire length. The surface is hairless when mature. Fiddleheads tightly coiled running with
a few loose, broad, light brown papery scales that soon fall; they do not have a thick woolly coating. The
channel is clearly visible. Vegetative fronds deciduous, 5-9 per rosette, 3-6' (1-2m) tall and 12-18" (30-46 deen
wide, widest above the middle and abruptly narrowing to the tip, strongly ascending to arching, once compound
Pinna numerous, usually overlapping if laid flat, paired or alternating, sessile or nearly so, 6 9' (15-23
long and 0.6-0.9" (15-23 mm) wide, tapered to the tip, with numerous entire, blunt-tipped pinnate obes cut
more than halfway to the midrib. The lowest pinnae begin near the base and are much reduced; they inc rease
in size gradually going up the rachis. Midvein (of pinna) is raised above and shallowly but broadly channeled
Veinlets straight, unbranched, depressed, in a herringbone pattern running to the margin. Fertile fronds
appear in mid to late summer, up to 5 per rosette, vertical, about half as tall as the leafy fronds. the pin pinna
inrolled to form a long, tough, pod-like structure, with the sori hidden in the rolls. These "pods" are first dark
green but dry to brown; fertile fronds become very stiff and persist through the winter.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Cinnamon fern and interrupted fern Osmunda claytoniana (mildly poisonous)
densely woolly as fiddleheads and lack the grooved stem. The fiddleheads of lady fern (p. 8) are smaller
loosely coiled, and wavy with dark, twisted scales and a shallower groove.
HABITAT: Rich disturbed soil in moderate shade to full sun. Needs bare soil to colonize, thus is most common
in river floodplains, where it sometimes forms enormous stands. Also ravines, steep slopes, logging trails.
roadsides, wooded construction sites. Native.
FOOD USE: Cut or pick the still-tightly-coiled fiddleheads and the attached tender
shoots in spring, taking 2-4 per clump. These may be up to 26" (66 cm) tall on large
specimens. You can eat more than the coiled part-please don't waste good food
just because it doesn't look like a snail. Steam or boil for 8-10 minutes. Conserva-
tion 2. WARNING: Do not eat them raw.
COMMENTS: This vegetable is commonly served in restaurants in certain parts
of the Northeast and Canada. Raw ostrich fern fiddleheads cause sickness in suf-
ficient quantity. Fiddleheads sold commercially are often
misidentified, but the deep groove on the stem makes
this species unmistakable to people who pay attention.
Spore fronds persisting
37
from the previous year.
6 Ostrich fern 3 UI FH-78 Matteucia struthiopteris family Onocleaceae QUICK the CHECK: of Fronds in a funnel-like rosette, with a deep " shaped length the stem; spore fronds separate, dark, stiff, persistent ID gramm difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Spreads by thin rhizomes, often to form large colonies. The base a dark-brown, scaly pedestal or tussock up to 10" (25 cm) high. Rachis/stipe becomes deeper than wide, with a deep, U-shaped channel (like the groove in a celery stalk) straight, the entire length. The surface is hairless when mature. Fiddleheads tightly coiled running with a few loose, broad, light brown papery scales that soon fall; they do not have a thick woolly coating. The channel is clearly visible. Vegetative fronds deciduous, 5-9 per rosette, 3-6' (1-2m) tall and 12-18" (30-46 deen wide, widest above the middle and abruptly narrowing to the tip, strongly ascending to arching, once compound Pinna numerous, usually overlapping if laid flat, paired or alternating, sessile or nearly so, 6 9' (15-23 long and 0.6-0.9" (15-23 mm) wide, tapered to the tip, with numerous entire, blunt-tipped pinnate obes cut more than halfway to the midrib. The lowest pinnae begin near the base and are much reduced; they inc rease in size gradually going up the rachis. Midvein (of pinna) is raised above and shallowly but broadly channeled Veinlets straight, unbranched, depressed, in a herringbone pattern running to the margin. Fertile fronds appear in mid to late summer, up to 5 per rosette, vertical, about half as tall as the leafy fronds. the pin pinna inrolled to form a long, tough, pod-like structure, with the sori hidden in the rolls. These "pods" are first dark green but dry to brown; fertile fronds become very stiff and persist through the winter. CONFUSING PLANTS: Cinnamon fern and interrupted fern Osmunda claytoniana (mildly poisonous) densely woolly as fiddleheads and lack the grooved stem. The fiddleheads of lady fern (p. 8) are smaller loosely coiled, and wavy with dark, twisted scales and a shallower groove. HABITAT: Rich disturbed soil in moderate shade to full sun. Needs bare soil to colonize, thus is most common in river floodplains, where it sometimes forms enormous stands. Also ravines, steep slopes, logging trails. roadsides, wooded construction sites. Native. FOOD USE: Cut or pick the still-tightly-coiled fiddleheads and the attached tender shoots in spring, taking 2-4 per clump. These may be up to 26" (66 cm) tall on large specimens. You can eat more than the coiled part-please don't waste good food just because it doesn't look like a snail. Steam or boil for 8-10 minutes. Conserva- tion 2. WARNING: Do not eat them raw. COMMENTS: This vegetable is commonly served in restaurants in certain parts of the Northeast and Canada. Raw ostrich fern fiddleheads cause sickness in suf- ficient quantity. Fiddleheads sold commercially are often misidentified, but the deep groove on the stem makes this species unmistakable to people who pay attention. Spore fronds persisting 37 from the previous year. 