FERN-LIKE PLANTS, PALMS, AND HORSETAILS
5
Cinnamon fern
Osmunda cinnamomea family Osmundaceae
fern of acidic swamps with fronds in a rosette; ID rachis difficulty not grooved, 2.
woolly QUICK when CHECK: young, Large spore fronds separate and cinnamon-colored.
Perennial fern from a tussock up to 12" (30 cm) tall, sometimes D-shaped branch-
DESCRIPTION: with old roots and the bases of dead fronds. Stipe/rachis smooth, with tiny tuft of
ing, covered section, not grooved. naked in the lower quarter, to 1 cm thick, covered a with
in cross hairs at the base of each pinna. Fiddleheads tightly coiled, densely funnel-like
brownish woolly hairs, and not grooved. Vegetative fronds form a
white and rusty-colored are strongly ascending, 2-5' (60-150 cm) tall and about one fifth as wide, almost straight the rachis to
rosette. They pinnately compound, the tips tapered to a point. Pinnae half-sessile, touching spaced so
gently the arching, proximal once side only, usually paired on the lower part of the frond and alternate near the tip, lobes that
on to rarely touch. Pinnae are often curved, tapered to a point, cut deeply but usually not fully into on
often as overlap. Lobes are blunt and entire. Veinlets fork 1-3 times. Fertile fronds fewer, erect and straight,
flimsier stems in the center of the rosette, growing as tall or taller than vegetative fronds, the spore pinnae
short and strongly ascending, turning cinnamon-brown before withering in early summer.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Interrupted fern Osmunda claytoniana (mildly toxic) is closely related and very similar
in appearance, but its rachises lack the tufts of rusty hairs where the pinnae are attached. Fertile fronds of
interrupted fern have the leafy portion interrupted by spore-producing pinnae, which are evident even on
the fiddleheads.
HABITAT: Full sun to light shade in moist, acidic soil, especially where sandy. Shrub swamps, bog forests,
swamp edges, lakeshores, ditches, depressions in sandy country. Look for it especially around tamarack. Native.
FOOD USE: Some people gather the fiddleheads in spring and eat them cooked, but they are quite astringent,
and I recommend against it. A small handful in a large stew won't completely ruin the flavor. Some people
who eat these collect them by perpetual mistake, but others think wild foods are supposed to taste bad and
knowingly insist that cinnamon ferns are the "right" fiddleheads. I include the plant here mostly for their
emotional benefit, yet uncertain that this benefit justifies the space. The curved heart of the crown in very
early spring, before the fiddleheads emerge, sometimes called the "fern banana," tastes slightly better than
the fiddleheads, but one must kill the crown to get it. I recommend against eating the fiddleheads, and only feel
slightly better about the hearts. Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: This species (along with interrupted
fern) is often mistakenly mixed with the commer-
supply of ostrich fern fiddleheads-despite the
fact that they are very easy to tell apart.
WARNING: Eating these fiddleheads raw (or
in large quantities, even cooked) makes people
sick! Lengthy boiling and draining probably helps
prevent this, but not as well as avoiding them.
36
FERN-LIKE PLANTS, PALMS, AND HORSETAILS 5 Cinnamon fern Osmunda cinnamomea family Osmundaceae fern of acidic swamps with fronds in a rosette; ID rachis difficulty not grooved, 2. woolly QUICK when CHECK: young, Large spore fronds separate and cinnamon-colored. Perennial fern from a tussock up to 12" (30 cm) tall, sometimes D-shaped branch- DESCRIPTION: with old roots and the bases of dead fronds. Stipe/rachis smooth, with tiny tuft of ing, covered section, not grooved. naked in the lower quarter, to 1 cm thick, covered a with in cross hairs at the base of each pinna. Fiddleheads tightly coiled, densely funnel-like brownish woolly hairs, and not grooved. Vegetative fronds form a white and rusty-colored are strongly ascending, 2-5' (60-150 cm) tall and about one fifth as wide, almost straight the rachis to rosette. They pinnately compound, the tips tapered to a point. Pinnae half-sessile, touching spaced so gently the arching, proximal once side only, usually paired on the lower part of the frond and alternate near the tip, lobes that on to rarely touch. Pinnae are often curved, tapered to a point, cut deeply but usually not fully into on often as overlap. Lobes are blunt and entire. Veinlets fork 1-3 times. Fertile fronds fewer, erect and straight, flimsier stems in the center of the rosette, growing as tall or taller than vegetative fronds, the spore pinnae short and strongly ascending, turning cinnamon-brown before withering in early summer. CONFUSING PLANTS: Interrupted fern Osmunda claytoniana (mildly toxic) is closely related and very similar in appearance, but its rachises lack the tufts of rusty hairs where the pinnae are attached. Fertile fronds of interrupted fern have the leafy portion interrupted by spore-producing pinnae, which are evident even on the fiddleheads. HABITAT: Full sun to light shade in moist, acidic soil, especially where sandy. Shrub swamps, bog forests, swamp edges, lakeshores, ditches, depressions in sandy country. Look for it especially around tamarack. Native. FOOD USE: Some people gather the fiddleheads in spring and eat them cooked, but they are quite astringent, and I recommend against it. A small handful in a large stew won't completely ruin the flavor. Some people who eat these collect them by perpetual mistake, but others think wild foods are supposed to taste bad and knowingly insist that cinnamon ferns are the "right" fiddleheads. I include the plant here mostly for their emotional benefit, yet uncertain that this benefit justifies the space. The curved heart of the crown in very early spring, before the fiddleheads emerge, sometimes called the "fern banana," tastes slightly better than the fiddleheads, but one must kill the crown to get it. I recommend against eating the fiddleheads, and only feel slightly better about the hearts. Conservation 3. COMMENTS: This species (along with interrupted fern) is often mistakenly mixed with the commer- supply of ostrich fern fiddleheads-despite the fact that they are very easy to tell apart. WARNING: Eating these fiddleheads raw (or in large quantities, even cooked) makes people sick! Lengthy boiling and draining probably helps prevent this, but not as well as avoiding them. 36 