7 Lady fern
Athyrium filix-femina 2 family Athyriaceae
Fronds clumped, shallowly grooved with elongated, ID difficulty dark, 1. hair-like
QUICK tiddleheads CHECK: coiled loosely and wavy when unfurling.
scales: sometimes forming small colonies, from prominent a short
green inside. creeping U-shaped DESCRIPTION: but There rootstock 0 groove hair-like purple are no Medium (but at color divisions papery soil not phase level to so scales large in deep or is the slightly common. as fern, as lower which they the raised. third. groove persist uncoil; When Stem/rachis The in mature the through a surface celery dark there hair-like the 4-7 is or smooth ostrich summer. mm are thick scales 2 light but fern Fiddleheads with with are green stalk), a scattered ribbons usually
small, dark, loosely twisted, and
are coiled Fronds ascending,
elongated, prominent. rosette-like. They are
often look wavy or "tentacle-like" (15-46 cm) wide, in clumps of 4-7 that are sometimes stalkless nearly so,
3-6" twice in is 1.5-4 deeply the (8-15 compound. (46-120 center and cm) of narrowly cm) long the widest long frond. and depressed and up in Pinnules the to 6-18" 1" middle, (2.5 bearing on sessile, top. cm) and The structures) wide, tapered pinnately lowest tapered to are pinnae lobed, a to point. found a long are each Pinnae at about point, the lobe base mostly 1/3 fully broad of the divided pinnule alternate, or length narrow into lobes of the with pinnules. and broadest 2-3 are or sharp elongated, The pinnae rachis teeth;
these
lack
bristle
tips.
Sori
(spore
hooked, or horseshoe-shaped.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Many wood ferns (genus
Dryopteris) are similar, but most species have
much larger first (lower) pinnae. The sori of wood
ferns are roundish, not elongated or hooked. In the
fiddlehead stage the papery scales on the stems
of wood ferns are much more prevalent; they are
broader, lighter brown, overlapping, and triangular
in shape. See also ostrich fern above.
HABITAT: Cool, moist hardwood, conifer, or
especially mixed conifer-hardwood forests, in
heavy to moderate shade. Also in moist ditches,
forest edges, openings, and occasionally mead-
OWS. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather a few tender fiddleheads per
plant when tips are still
curled in spring. Use
as a cooked vegetable.
Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: I love
the look of these green
and purple octopus
tentacles that pop up
in springtime forests.
Although smaller, it is
generally more com-
mon and widespread
than ostrich fern; I find
lady fern only slightly
inferior in flavor. In the
Pacific Northwest it
grows larger and seems
to taste a little better.
Green and purple
color phases,
7 Lady fern Athyrium filix-femina 2 family Athyriaceae Fronds clumped, shallowly grooved with elongated, ID difficulty dark, 1. hair-like QUICK tiddleheads CHECK: coiled loosely and wavy when unfurling. scales: sometimes forming small colonies, from prominent a short green inside. creeping U-shaped DESCRIPTION: but There rootstock 0 groove hair-like purple are no Medium (but at color divisions papery soil not phase level to so scales large in deep or is the slightly common. as fern, as lower which they the raised. third. groove persist uncoil; When Stem/rachis The in mature the through a surface celery dark there hair-like the 4-7 is or smooth ostrich summer. mm are thick scales 2 light but fern Fiddleheads with with are green stalk), a scattered ribbons usually small, dark, loosely twisted, and are coiled Fronds ascending, elongated, prominent. rosette-like. They are often look wavy or "tentacle-like" (15-46 cm) wide, in clumps of 4-7 that are sometimes stalkless nearly so, 3-6" twice in is 1.5-4 deeply the (8-15 compound. (46-120 center and cm) of narrowly cm) long the widest long frond. and depressed and up in Pinnules the to 6-18" 1" middle, (2.5 bearing on sessile, top. cm) and The structures) wide, tapered pinnately lowest tapered to are pinnae lobed, a to point. found a long are each Pinnae at about point, the lobe base mostly 1/3 fully broad of the divided pinnule alternate, or length narrow into lobes of the with pinnules. and broadest 2-3 are or sharp elongated, The pinnae rachis teeth; these lack bristle tips. Sori (spore hooked, or horseshoe-shaped. CONFUSING PLANTS: Many wood ferns (genus Dryopteris) are similar, but most species have much larger first (lower) pinnae. The sori of wood ferns are roundish, not elongated or hooked. In the fiddlehead stage the papery scales on the stems of wood ferns are much more prevalent; they are broader, lighter brown, overlapping, and triangular in shape. See also ostrich fern above. HABITAT: Cool, moist hardwood, conifer, or especially mixed conifer-hardwood forests, in heavy to moderate shade. Also in moist ditches, forest edges, openings, and occasionally mead- OWS. Native. FOOD USE: Gather a few tender fiddleheads per plant when tips are still curled in spring. Use as a cooked vegetable. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: I love the look of these green and purple octopus tentacles that pop up in springtime forests. Although smaller, it is generally more com- mon and widespread than ostrich fern; I find lady fern only slightly inferior in flavor. In the Pacific Northwest it grows larger and seems to taste a little better. Green and purple color phases, 