PLANTS, PALMS, AND HORSETAILS
8 Cabbage palm
3
Sabal palmetto
Arecaceae (Palm family)
QUICK flowers CHECK: Unbranched palm with down-curled leaves and anormous
tiny and spherical black fruit. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Palm tree commonly 12-50' (4-15 m) tall. Trunk single,
the proportionately thick, roughened by old leaf scars. Dead petiole bases often unbranched,
upper trunk below the living leaves, disintegrating after many years; diamond-shaped persist on
gaps of between them can give the impression of a latticework over the trunk. Leaves in a large terminal
25-40, fan-like, growing at the end of flattened petioles 4.5-7' (140-210 cm) long. Blades 6' (150-180.cm cluster
long, palmately divided into 40-90 sword-like segments, those near the leaf tip much shorter than the
ments near the base. Segments usually have loose whitish fibers hanging along their margins. The blade cas seg- A
prominent midrib (costa) extending nearly to the tip; this midrib is strongly curled downward. Inflorescence an
enormous panicle 4-6' (120-180 cm) long spreading from leaf axils, branching into numerous spikes. Flow-
ers (early summer) minute and cup-like, 4-6 mm long with 3 off-white, ovate, boat-like petals. Fruit spherica
shiny, black, 7-12 mm across, with a thin dryish flesh and a single spherical seed filling most of its VO ume
HABITAT: Low sandy areas, especially near ponds and marshes, most abundant near the coast. Native.
FOOD USE: Palm hearts are the newly forming leaves and tender leaf bases at the center of the growing 0
These are available all year, especially spring and early summer. A single palm heart is large enough to make
a large soup or stir fry and the flavor is fantastic, but you have to kill the tree and cut away all the leaves to get
it. Fruit is available in October and November and can be collected in large quantity, but there is little pulp
around the large seed, and it doesn't taste very good. Conservation 3/1.
COMMENTS: This species has been collected to the point of extermination in many areas for its heart-of
palm. It should only be eaten today in situations where the trees are being taken by development, road build-
ing, etc, or have toppled by some natural cause. If you keep your eye out, this actually happens pretty often.
Peeled heart
Addiess
of a cabbage
palm
Young trunks
hold the
Conservation:
bases of old
leafstalks
COMMENTS
39
PLANTS, PALMS, AND HORSETAILS 8 Cabbage palm 3 Sabal palmetto Arecaceae (Palm family) QUICK flowers CHECK: Unbranched palm with down-curled leaves and anormous tiny and spherical black fruit. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Palm tree commonly 12-50' (4-15 m) tall. Trunk single, the proportionately thick, roughened by old leaf scars. Dead petiole bases often unbranched, upper trunk below the living leaves, disintegrating after many years; diamond-shaped persist on gaps of between them can give the impression of a latticework over the trunk. Leaves in a large terminal 25-40, fan-like, growing at the end of flattened petioles 4.5-7' (140-210 cm) long. Blades 6' (150-180.cm cluster long, palmately divided into 40-90 sword-like segments, those near the leaf tip much shorter than the ments near the base. Segments usually have loose whitish fibers hanging along their margins. The blade cas seg- A prominent midrib (costa) extending nearly to the tip; this midrib is strongly curled downward. Inflorescence an enormous panicle 4-6' (120-180 cm) long spreading from leaf axils, branching into numerous spikes. Flow- ers (early summer) minute and cup-like, 4-6 mm long with 3 off-white, ovate, boat-like petals. Fruit spherica shiny, black, 7-12 mm across, with a thin dryish flesh and a single spherical seed filling most of its VO ume HABITAT: Low sandy areas, especially near ponds and marshes, most abundant near the coast. Native. FOOD USE: Palm hearts are the newly forming leaves and tender leaf bases at the center of the growing 0 These are available all year, especially spring and early summer. A single palm heart is large enough to make a large soup or stir fry and the flavor is fantastic, but you have to kill the tree and cut away all the leaves to get it. Fruit is available in October and November and can be collected in large quantity, but there is little pulp around the large seed, and it doesn't taste very good. Conservation 3/1. COMMENTS: This species has been collected to the point of extermination in many areas for its heart-of palm. It should only be eaten today in situations where the trees are being taken by development, road build- ing, etc, or have toppled by some natural cause. If you keep your eye out, this actually happens pretty often. Peeled heart Addiess of a cabbage palm Young trunks hold the Conservation: bases of old leafstalks COMMENTS 39 