COMMENTS:
This
is
the
aboven
tous palmetto of pine flat Mind
in the coastal South, especially
Florida. The fruit is collected for
medicinal use, which has become
a multi million-dollar industry
Due to anti foraging insanit. it
is illegal to collect these herries
from your own property without
a permit in Florida. but you can
destroy all the palmetto piants /04
want. Collecting the heart rills the
crown for a tiny morsel of food. but
healthy colonies can spare some
and many acres of palmetto land
are developed yearly, offering?
lions of guilt-free hearts.
Related edible:
10 Dwarf palmetto
+
Sabal minor
3
2
QUICK CHECK: Low palm with a single stem, drooping leaf tips, and long-stemmed
clusters of spherical fruit. ID difficulty 1.
This species resembles saw palmetto at a glance but is actually more closely related to the
cabbage palm. The name can be confusing because it is dwarf in relation to the cabbage
But
palm-but actually larger than the saw palmetto. The petiole of dwarf palmetto is longer,
wider, and stiffer, broadly channeled, and has a faint central ridge. The margins are upturned and lack prickles
The blade has a very short midrib that you might fail to notice at a glance. The inflorescence usually grows well
past the leaves on a long stalk that is arching and naked for 2-3' (60-90 cm). The fruit is black and spherical,
about 1 cm in diameter, with a large single seed. The hearts of the dwarf palmetto are similarly edible and
larger than those of saw palmetto, and the sweet berries have thin pulp with much better flavor than those of
cabbage palm or saw palmetto. I like to snack on them while hiking. Conservation 3/1.
41
COMMENTS: This is the aboven tous palmetto of pine flat Mind in the coastal South, especially Florida. The fruit is collected for medicinal use, which has become a multi million-dollar industry Due to anti foraging insanit. it is illegal to collect these herries from your own property without a permit in Florida. but you can destroy all the palmetto piants /04 want. Collecting the heart rills the crown for a tiny morsel of food. but healthy colonies can spare some and many acres of palmetto land are developed yearly, offering? lions of guilt-free hearts. Related edible: 10 Dwarf palmetto + Sabal minor 3 2 QUICK CHECK: Low palm with a single stem, drooping leaf tips, and long-stemmed clusters of spherical fruit. ID difficulty 1. This species resembles saw palmetto at a glance but is actually more closely related to the cabbage palm. The name can be confusing because it is dwarf in relation to the cabbage But palm-but actually larger than the saw palmetto. The petiole of dwarf palmetto is longer, wider, and stiffer, broadly channeled, and has a faint central ridge. The margins are upturned and lack prickles The blade has a very short midrib that you might fail to notice at a glance. The inflorescence usually grows well past the leaves on a long stalk that is arching and naked for 2-3' (60-90 cm). The fruit is black and spherical, about 1 cm in diameter, with a large single seed. The hearts of the dwarf palmetto are similarly edible and larger than those of saw palmetto, and the sweet berries have thin pulp with much better flavor than those of cabbage palm or saw palmetto. I like to snack on them while hiking. Conservation 3/1. 41 