FERN-LIKE PLANTS, PALMS, AND
9 Saw palmetto
3
1
Serenoa repens Arecaceae (Palm family)
Miniature palm with fan-like leaves and spiny petioles. ID difficulty stout, the 1.
QUICK CHECK: palm often forming extensive colonies. Stems often hidden
DESCRIPTION: Ground-level branching, creeping along the ground (although densely clustered
surface dark and rough-scaly, chest level and leaning or arching. Leaves tightly packed sword-
near by litter), the stem rising tip, sometimes evergreen, to from 2.5-4 one (76-120 point. cm) There across, is no midrib. with 25-30 Divisions conjoined, the pleated midvein accordion-like near the base at
like divisions radiating 320° (41-66 cm) long, tough, folded along wide, broadly
the base but free and the separate tip, which distally, is often 16-26" split. Petioles 2-4' (60-120 cm) long, up on to each 1" (2.5 edge. cm) Inflorescence a
triangular, not channeled, cluster smooth up to 3' (1 but m) long that does not surpass the leaves, the with branches light-colored green reflexed
but flatter toward for the namesake row of sharp prickles light with
branching leafless scales. Flowers (May-July) small and unshowy, 5-6 mm long, black 3 in autumn.
petals. contrasting Fruit purplish oblong, 0.5-0.9" (13-23 mm) long with a single large seed; ripens to
HABITAT: Pine flatwoods of the coastal plain, coastal scrublands, dunes, high spots in marshes, sandy oak
woods close to the water table. Native.
USE: The small palm hearts can be cut out of the center of the leaf cluster year-round and eaten the raw (with or
FOOD cooked. Try not to saw up your hands when doing this. Some people grab several petioles close to thin tip pulp
twist them together, and then yank on this "braid" to pull the heart out. Fruit (autumn) has a
that gloves), can be sucked off the hard seeds, dried and ground, or steeped for tea. These are edible but have a strong
cheesy vomit flavor that most
people don't like. Nevertheless
they have been consumed for
millennia. Conservation 3/1,
The hearts are often
very small.
40
FERN-LIKE PLANTS, PALMS, AND 9 Saw palmetto 3 1 Serenoa repens Arecaceae (Palm family) Miniature palm with fan-like leaves and spiny petioles. ID difficulty stout, the 1. QUICK CHECK: palm often forming extensive colonies. Stems often hidden DESCRIPTION: Ground-level branching, creeping along the ground (although densely clustered surface dark and rough-scaly, chest level and leaning or arching. Leaves tightly packed sword- near by litter), the stem rising tip, sometimes evergreen, to from 2.5-4 one (76-120 point. cm) There across, is no midrib. with 25-30 Divisions conjoined, the pleated midvein accordion-like near the base at like divisions radiating 320° (41-66 cm) long, tough, folded along wide, broadly the base but free and the separate tip, which distally, is often 16-26" split. Petioles 2-4' (60-120 cm) long, up on to each 1" (2.5 edge. cm) Inflorescence a triangular, not channeled, cluster smooth up to 3' (1 but m) long that does not surpass the leaves, the with branches light-colored green reflexed but flatter toward for the namesake row of sharp prickles light with branching leafless scales. Flowers (May-July) small and unshowy, 5-6 mm long, black 3 in autumn. petals. contrasting Fruit purplish oblong, 0.5-0.9" (13-23 mm) long with a single large seed; ripens to HABITAT: Pine flatwoods of the coastal plain, coastal scrublands, dunes, high spots in marshes, sandy oak woods close to the water table. Native. USE: The small palm hearts can be cut out of the center of the leaf cluster year-round and eaten the raw (with or FOOD cooked. Try not to saw up your hands when doing this. Some people grab several petioles close to thin tip pulp twist them together, and then yank on this "braid" to pull the heart out. Fruit (autumn) has a that gloves), can be sucked off the hard seeds, dried and ground, or steeped for tea. These are edible but have a strong cheesy vomit flavor that most people don't like. Nevertheless they have been consumed for millennia. Conservation 3/1, The hearts are often very small. 40 