Ö
tem
SUCCULENT LEAFLESS STEMS (CACTI AND GLASSWORT)
2
Prickly pear
2
genus Opuntia Cactaceae (Cactus family) NG-206
QUICK egg with CHECK: the wide Flattened, spiny pads connected to each other; fruits shaped like an
end cut off. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: to nearly round, Medium to large cacti consisting of multiple flattened pads,
in chains of connected by relatively narrow joints. Some species trail oval-shaped
another. Pads connected pads, others rise taller than a person, the pads stacked along the ground
with flat and smooth, lacking ridges or raised nipple-like structures, the one upon
scattered areoles with glochid clusters; some areoles, especially near the surface bear
long, leaves needle-like spines. Young pads from late spring through early summer have margin,
Collective
resembling thick fir needles growing from their areoles; these are dropped vestigial as they
range vouding
0 fragilis, which
mature. Flowers (early to mid summer) borne on the upper rims of pads, with numerous
is
large yellow petals with broad, ragged outer edges. The center has numerous stamens.
bother with
Fruit 1-4" (2.5-10 cm) long depending on species, oblong to egg-shaped with the end truncated and ightly
depressed, ripening to burgundy, containing numerous semi-hard seeds.
SPECIES: The most widespread native species in our region is eastern prickly pear O. humifusa. Nnich 5
found in well-drained, sunny, sandy locations, particularly steep south slopes, upper beaches, dures. and
sandstone outcrops. Plains prickly pear O. macrorhiza, slightly more well-armed, is found on dry soils in the
Great Plains. These are both small and mostly ground-hugging, rising no more than 8-16" (20-40 cm) Desert
prickly pear O. engelmanii is a much larger species of the Southwest, up to 6' (2 m) tall, entering our area
the dry prairies of central Texas, but often planted ornamentally outside of its native range.
FOOD USE: Young pads that still have vestigial leaves in early summer make a good cooked vegetable; older
pads are edible but of lower quality. Pick pads with gloves or tongs in one hand and a knife in the other. The
larger spines and the tiny glochids must be cut, burned, or scraped off. I use a copper scratch pad for the latter
Cleaned pads can be cut into strips and fried with other vegetables or added to soups. Flower petals, available
in early to mid summer, are easy to collect and innocuous. They make a
pleasant nibble or addition to salads or vegetable dishes. Fruits, called
prickly pears or tunas, ripen in late summer or early autumn. The flavor
of some species reminds me of melons, in others of cherries. Remove
the glochids by scrubbing and rinsing. Fruits are delicious raw and can
be made into juice, jelly, or many other preparations. They store well in
a refrigerator. Seeds have a tough shell but contain a nutritious kernel:
they can be chewed up or pounded for use in gruel. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: All parts have a mucilaginous texture. Pads are commonly
used in Mexican cooking and can often be found in the produce aisle.
WARNING: Glochids are hard to see and can cause serious
Also, consuming a large quantity of fruit can cause stomeen
some people.
O. engelmanii.
O. humifusa.
Ö tem SUCCULENT LEAFLESS STEMS (CACTI AND GLASSWORT) 2 Prickly pear 2 genus Opuntia Cactaceae (Cactus family) NG-206 QUICK egg with CHECK: the wide Flattened, spiny pads connected to each other; fruits shaped like an end cut off. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: to nearly round, Medium to large cacti consisting of multiple flattened pads, in chains of connected by relatively narrow joints. Some species trail oval-shaped another. Pads connected pads, others rise taller than a person, the pads stacked along the ground with flat and smooth, lacking ridges or raised nipple-like structures, the one upon scattered areoles with glochid clusters; some areoles, especially near the surface bear long, leaves needle-like spines. Young pads from late spring through early summer have margin, Collective resembling thick fir needles growing from their areoles; these are dropped vestigial as they range vouding 0 fragilis, which mature. Flowers (early to mid summer) borne on the upper rims of pads, with numerous is large yellow petals with broad, ragged outer edges. The center has numerous stamens. bother with Fruit 1-4" (2.5-10 cm) long depending on species, oblong to egg-shaped with the end truncated and ightly depressed, ripening to burgundy, containing numerous semi-hard seeds. SPECIES: The most widespread native species in our region is eastern prickly pear O. humifusa. Nnich 5 found in well-drained, sunny, sandy locations, particularly steep south slopes, upper beaches, dures. and sandstone outcrops. Plains prickly pear O. macrorhiza, slightly more well-armed, is found on dry soils in the Great Plains. These are both small and mostly ground-hugging, rising no more than 8-16" (20-40 cm) Desert prickly pear O. engelmanii is a much larger species of the Southwest, up to 6' (2 m) tall, entering our area the dry prairies of central Texas, but often planted ornamentally outside of its native range. FOOD USE: Young pads that still have vestigial leaves in early summer make a good cooked vegetable; older pads are edible but of lower quality. Pick pads with gloves or tongs in one hand and a knife in the other. The larger spines and the tiny glochids must be cut, burned, or scraped off. I use a copper scratch pad for the latter Cleaned pads can be cut into strips and fried with other vegetables or added to soups. Flower petals, available in early to mid summer, are easy to collect and innocuous. They make a pleasant nibble or addition to salads or vegetable dishes. Fruits, called prickly pears or tunas, ripen in late summer or early autumn. The flavor of some species reminds me of melons, in others of cherries. Remove the glochids by scrubbing and rinsing. Fruits are delicious raw and can be made into juice, jelly, or many other preparations. They store well in a refrigerator. Seeds have a tough shell but contain a nutritious kernel: they can be chewed up or pounded for use in gruel. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: All parts have a mucilaginous texture. Pads are commonly used in Mexican cooking and can often be found in the produce aisle. WARNING: Glochids are hard to see and can cause serious Also, consuming a large quantity of fruit can cause stomeen some people. O. engelmanii. O. humifusa. 