SUCCULENT LEAFLESS STEMS (CACTI AND
SUCCULENT LEAFLESS STEMS (CACTI AND GLASSWORT)
GROUP glassworts are not related but share the feature of edible of cactis having thick. much higher fleshy key stems west
andine Cacti and leaves (0' vestigia: leaves only) The diversity only a few species. I have left out the spines
of our region Because this the group depression contains from which a tuft of penetrate hairs. glochids. skin or
grows. The areole Glochids of a cactus are tiny, is stiff. barbed hairs that painfully
Pincushion cactus
2
1
Coryphantha missouriensis
+
Cactaceae
(Cactus
family)
QUICK CHECK: Ground-level cactus with clusters of spines on nipple-like projections;
truits tiny and bright red. ID difficulty 1.
cactus 2-4" (5-10 cm) wide, barely rising above the soil of level adjacent with
DESCRIPTION: Low spreading by basal offshoots to form large clumps
a dome-shaped top, consists often of numerous nipple-like projections. each with a flattened cluster with of radiating numerous spines nar-
stems The surface to early summer) much larger than the fruit. 1-2 (2-5 cm) across often red-tinted
rowly at its tip. lanceolate, Flowers sharp-tipped (spring petals that are dull yeilow to greenish-yellow with a darkened
central stripe. Anthers
are yellow and numer-
ous. Fruit bright red,
egg-shaped, 6-8 mm
long, attached in the
depressions between
nipples. with many
small. crunchy. black
seeds: ripens the spring
after flowering.
CONFUSING PLANTS:
C. vivipara is an inedible
relative with red flowers
and fruit that ripens to
green.
HABITAT: Well-
drained rocky, sandy, or
gravelly prairies. Native.
FOOD USE: The ripe
fruits are a fun snack
with a mild sweet flavor,
available from spring
through early summer It
car be hard to get them
without pricking your
fingers Conservation1.
COMMENTS: This
cartus is more cum
mon than many people
realize- itis justeasy to
overlook The fruits or
howers make 1 Easier
16 spot AKA beehive
'a' tus Escobano mis
souriensis Mammillana
missounense
42
SUCCULENT LEAFLESS STEMS (CACTI AND SUCCULENT LEAFLESS STEMS (CACTI AND GLASSWORT) GROUP glassworts are not related but share the feature of edible of cactis having thick. much higher fleshy key stems west andine Cacti and leaves (0' vestigia: leaves only) The diversity only a few species. I have left out the spines of our region Because this the group depression contains from which a tuft of penetrate hairs. glochids. skin or grows. The areole Glochids of a cactus are tiny, is stiff. barbed hairs that painfully Pincushion cactus 2 1 Coryphantha missouriensis + Cactaceae (Cactus family) QUICK CHECK: Ground-level cactus with clusters of spines on nipple-like projections; truits tiny and bright red. ID difficulty 1. cactus 2-4" (5-10 cm) wide, barely rising above the soil of level adjacent with DESCRIPTION: Low spreading by basal offshoots to form large clumps a dome-shaped top, consists often of numerous nipple-like projections. each with a flattened cluster with of radiating numerous spines nar- stems The surface to early summer) much larger than the fruit. 1-2 (2-5 cm) across often red-tinted rowly at its tip. lanceolate, Flowers sharp-tipped (spring petals that are dull yeilow to greenish-yellow with a darkened central stripe. Anthers are yellow and numer- ous. Fruit bright red, egg-shaped, 6-8 mm long, attached in the depressions between nipples. with many small. crunchy. black seeds: ripens the spring after flowering. CONFUSING PLANTS: C. vivipara is an inedible relative with red flowers and fruit that ripens to green. HABITAT: Well- drained rocky, sandy, or gravelly prairies. Native. FOOD USE: The ripe fruits are a fun snack with a mild sweet flavor, available from spring through early summer It car be hard to get them without pricking your fingers Conservation1. COMMENTS: This cartus is more cum mon than many people realize- itis justeasy to overlook The fruits or howers make 1 Easier 16 spot AKA beehive 'a' tus Escobano mis souriensis Mammillana missounense 42 