SUCCULENT LEAPLESS STEMS (CACTI AND GLASSWORT)
5 Glasswort
3
genus Salicornia
family Amaranthaceae
QUICK and CHECK: Thick, succulent, erect, jointed stems with paired ase ending
no apparent leaves. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: (40 cm) tall, Annual with succulent, erect stems about
dull green in with paired ascending branches. Stems and branches 5 mm are hairless, in diameter. to 16"
blunt-tipped, summer, jointed (the joints much more densely packed toward cylindrical,
gets thicker the tips often reddish (the whole plant turning reddish in autumn). branch tips),
sheaths conjoined. below each joint. Leaves are reduced to a sheath with a tiny scale around The stem
tips, sunken into Flowers tiny, unshowy, in paired clusters of 3 flowers each at the nodes 1 mm long, paired the
single-seeded the leaf axils and hidden, with only the white stamens protruding. They produce toward a) tiny, the elliotic branch
fruit, slightly flattened and greenish-brown.
HABITAT: Salty or brackish wetlands on or near the coast. Occasionally inland in salty depressions Native
FOOD USE: Gather top growth from spring through fall, going down only as far as the stems are tender Scane
on the beach or use them chopped into salads. The flavor is pleasantly salty and mild, the texture crisp when
raw-but it is also good cooked. Stem sections are also sometimes pickled. Conservation 2.
SPECIES: The coastal annual glassworts, described above, are sometimes lumped under the name S. euro
pea, and sometimes split into multiple species. Plants from the northern Great Plains are often separated as
S. rubra. Perennial glassworts are known as S. depressa or S. ambigua. These spread by rhizome to form dense
mats. The stems are shorter and unbranched, with segments packed very densely toward the tips. Perenn 31
glassworts are somewhat tougher than the annual species.
COMMENTS: Easy to recognize, simple to gather, and fun to eat. Bring along a child who needs vegetables
Glassworts are sometimes gathered for use in restaurants and go by many names. AKA saltwort, sea beans
sea asparagus, samphire, and pickleweed.
45
SUCCULENT LEAPLESS STEMS (CACTI AND GLASSWORT) 5 Glasswort 3 genus Salicornia family Amaranthaceae QUICK and CHECK: Thick, succulent, erect, jointed stems with paired ase ending no apparent leaves. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: (40 cm) tall, Annual with succulent, erect stems about dull green in with paired ascending branches. Stems and branches 5 mm are hairless, in diameter. to 16" blunt-tipped, summer, jointed (the joints much more densely packed toward cylindrical, gets thicker the tips often reddish (the whole plant turning reddish in autumn). branch tips), sheaths conjoined. below each joint. Leaves are reduced to a sheath with a tiny scale around The stem tips, sunken into Flowers tiny, unshowy, in paired clusters of 3 flowers each at the nodes 1 mm long, paired the single-seeded the leaf axils and hidden, with only the white stamens protruding. They produce toward a) tiny, the elliotic branch fruit, slightly flattened and greenish-brown. HABITAT: Salty or brackish wetlands on or near the coast. Occasionally inland in salty depressions Native FOOD USE: Gather top growth from spring through fall, going down only as far as the stems are tender Scane on the beach or use them chopped into salads. The flavor is pleasantly salty and mild, the texture crisp when raw-but it is also good cooked. Stem sections are also sometimes pickled. Conservation 2. SPECIES: The coastal annual glassworts, described above, are sometimes lumped under the name S. euro pea, and sometimes split into multiple species. Plants from the northern Great Plains are often separated as S. rubra. Perennial glassworts are known as S. depressa or S. ambigua. These spread by rhizome to form dense mats. The stems are shorter and unbranched, with segments packed very densely toward the tips. Perenn 31 glassworts are somewhat tougher than the annual species. COMMENTS: Easy to recognize, simple to gather, and fun to eat. Bring along a child who needs vegetables Glassworts are sometimes gathered for use in restaurants and go by many names. AKA saltwort, sea beans sea asparagus, samphire, and pickleweed. 45 