SUCCULENT LEAFLESS STEMS (CACTI AND GLASSWORT)
3 Cane cholla
1
(Cactus
family)
imbricata
Cactaceae
Cylindropuntia CHECK: Bush-like cactus with spreading branches difficulty covered 1. with high, raised
QUICK flowers and yellow, ridged fruits. ID
ridges) purple Branching shrubby to tree-like cactus to 8' (2.5 m) tall. cm) Trunk long, to the 4" surface (10 cm)
DESCRIPTION: in clumps of a few. Segments cylindrical, to sharply 14" (36 raised, elongated, narrow
protuberances
(or
dark thick, green, single often or Terminal with a branches purple hue, are densely about 1" covered (2.5 cm) with thick. Spines 10-28 or per cone-shaped areole, reddish, and soon the central fall off.
spines longer, 2-3" (5-8 cm). Vestigial leaves of on new segments in early to mid summer, 2-3" yellow in late sum-
short ridges). segments are cylindric (5-8 cm) across,
Flowers borne singly or clumped at the tips pink to new purple, the anthers yellow. Fruits ripen to not growing in
Mark
the outer petals autumn greenish, and persist the inner into ones winter, rarely falling and taking root like (vegetatively), an egg with but the broad end cut
men through branches while on the plant. In outline they are shaped flesh is almost dry. The surface
chains or sunken sprouting in, but the surface has large, narrow, protruding lumps. The
lacks off and thorns and glochids. Seeds 2.5-4 mm across, irregularly shaped, yellowish-tan.
HABITAT: Well-drained, sunny, gravelly or sandy sites in dry prairies. Native.
USE: The ripe fruits are rather dry and have a bland chalky flavor but they are abundant and stems not
FOOD distasteful; can eat them raw, roasted, or boiled. (This is the only part I have eaten.) The young not
formerly you roasted and rubbed of their spines, then eaten or dried for storage, although they were roasted
highly were preferred and are rarely eaten today. I have not heard of the flower buds of this species being
and eaten like some of its western relatives, but that does
not mean it wasn't done or is impossible. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: The hollow stems with diamond-shaped
holes, left when the flesh rots away, are often used as walk-
ing sticks and decorations. This plant goes by a huge variety
of colloquial names. AKA tree cholla, Opuntia imbricata.
Related edible:
4 Pencil cholla
Cylindropuntia leptocaulis
2
This cactus often forms thickets of
interlocking, narrow stems, the termi-
nal branches about 1 cm thick or less. The
surface may be almost smooth or have
small protuberances. Spines few (1-3 per
areole) but formidable, widely spaced, erect, up to 2" (5 cm) long.
Flowers broadly spreading, about 0.8" (2 cm) wide, the petals
pale greenish-yellow. Fruit 9-14 mm long, egg-shaped, bright red,
ripening in late summer and persisting into or through winter, New
green stems sometimes grow from the fruit while it remains attached
to the plant. The fruit lacks large spines but 15 well armed with
glochids. The part eaten is the ripe fruit, and it is much better
than that of the cane cholla AKA tesajo cactus, Christmas cholla,
Opuntia leptocaulis. kub the glochids off carefully!
44
SUCCULENT LEAFLESS STEMS (CACTI AND GLASSWORT) 3 Cane cholla 1 (Cactus family) imbricata Cactaceae Cylindropuntia CHECK: Bush-like cactus with spreading branches difficulty covered 1. with high, raised QUICK flowers and yellow, ridged fruits. ID ridges) purple Branching shrubby to tree-like cactus to 8' (2.5 m) tall. cm) Trunk long, to the 4" surface (10 cm) DESCRIPTION: in clumps of a few. Segments cylindrical, to sharply 14" (36 raised, elongated, narrow protuberances (or dark thick, green, single often or Terminal with a branches purple hue, are densely about 1" covered (2.5 cm) with thick. Spines 10-28 or per cone-shaped areole, reddish, and soon the central fall off. spines longer, 2-3" (5-8 cm). Vestigial leaves of on new segments in early to mid summer, 2-3" yellow in late sum- short ridges). segments are cylindric (5-8 cm) across, Flowers borne singly or clumped at the tips pink to new purple, the anthers yellow. Fruits ripen to not growing in Mark the outer petals autumn greenish, and persist the inner into ones winter, rarely falling and taking root like (vegetatively), an egg with but the broad end cut men through branches while on the plant. In outline they are shaped flesh is almost dry. The surface chains or sunken sprouting in, but the surface has large, narrow, protruding lumps. The lacks off and thorns and glochids. Seeds 2.5-4 mm across, irregularly shaped, yellowish-tan. HABITAT: Well-drained, sunny, gravelly or sandy sites in dry prairies. Native. USE: The ripe fruits are rather dry and have a bland chalky flavor but they are abundant and stems not FOOD distasteful; can eat them raw, roasted, or boiled. (This is the only part I have eaten.) The young not formerly you roasted and rubbed of their spines, then eaten or dried for storage, although they were roasted highly were preferred and are rarely eaten today. I have not heard of the flower buds of this species being and eaten like some of its western relatives, but that does not mean it wasn't done or is impossible. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: The hollow stems with diamond-shaped holes, left when the flesh rots away, are often used as walk- ing sticks and decorations. This plant goes by a huge variety of colloquial names. AKA tree cholla, Opuntia imbricata. Related edible: 4 Pencil cholla Cylindropuntia leptocaulis 2 This cactus often forms thickets of interlocking, narrow stems, the termi- nal branches about 1 cm thick or less. The surface may be almost smooth or have small protuberances. Spines few (1-3 per areole) but formidable, widely spaced, erect, up to 2" (5 cm) long. Flowers broadly spreading, about 0.8" (2 cm) wide, the petals pale greenish-yellow. Fruit 9-14 mm long, egg-shaped, bright red, ripening in late summer and persisting into or through winter, New green stems sometimes grow from the fruit while it remains attached to the plant. The fruit lacks large spines but 15 well armed with glochids. The part eaten is the ripe fruit, and it is much better than that of the cane cholla AKA tesajo cactus, Christmas cholla, Opuntia leptocaulis. kub the glochids off carefully! 44 