1
Asian mulberry
3
2
IN
IWE-231
Morus alba + Moraceae (Mulberry family)
QUICK CHECK: Tree with glossy, often lobed leaves and hanging blac kherry like
ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Small to medium-sized tree to 60' (18 m) tall, the trunks sometimes
multiple, with densely branched, spreading crowns, Bark with numerous fine, shallow,
yellowish fissures separated by small gray ridges, Branches disorganized and bushy, the
twigs medium-sized, minutely hairy when green becoming hairless when older. Sap milky.
Leaves alternate, 1.5-7" (4-18 cm) long, ovate, ranging from deeply lobed to unlobed (more lobed or saplings
or shoots in full sun). Lobes have blunt tips, and the sinuses do not have teeth. Surface somewhat glossy above.
usually with few to no hairs but sometimes rough-hairy when young; the underside has hairs only along some of
the main veins, especially in their angles. Secondary veins slightly depressed above, two major ones emanating
from the base; veinlets are flat or nearly so. Margins toothed. Petioles 15-30% of blade length. Flowers (spring)
wind-pollinated, the male and female separate, on the same trees or on separate trees, tiny, greenish white.
in hanging catkins. Berry an elongated cluster of tiny fruitlets packed together, 0.5-1" (13-25 mm), ripening to
purple-black (occasionally red, pink, or white) in early to mid summer.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Easy to identify, but because people get confused by its name this is the most mis.
identified tree in North America.
HABITAT: A pioneer or weed tree of roadsides, old fields, vacant urban lots, parks, brushy áreas, forest
edges, and young woods. Thrives on rich soil. Introduced. I
FOOD USE: Gather berries from the branches by hand or shake them onto a tarp or cloth. They can be dried,
eaten fresh, or used in jams, jellies, pies, juice, or ice cream. Young leaves, especially on stump sprouts, can be
eaten as a cooked green and have been traditionally dried and powdered as a flour additive. Note: the warnings
sometimes seen about mulberry sap being hallucinogenic seem overblown and irrelevant to normal food use.
COMMENTS: This is the weedy mulberry familiar to most people, especially in the northern states where
it abounds in urban and agricultural landscapes. The ill-conceived names "white mulberry" and Morus alba
were given based upon aberrant, unpigmented cultivars. The white-fruited feral descendants of these cultivars invasive
are sometimes found, but purple-black is the normal color of the fruit. This is by far the most abundant
tree in our region, but because so many professionals confuse it with the
White mulberry fruit normally
native mulberry it has been largely ignored in the discussion and manage-
ripens to dark purple.
ment of invasive plants.
AKA white mulberry.
Close-up of the midvein
underside.
47
White-fruited abberation of Morus alba.
1 Asian mulberry 3 2 IN IWE-231 Morus alba + Moraceae (Mulberry family) QUICK CHECK: Tree with glossy, often lobed leaves and hanging blac kherry like ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Small to medium-sized tree to 60' (18 m) tall, the trunks sometimes multiple, with densely branched, spreading crowns, Bark with numerous fine, shallow, yellowish fissures separated by small gray ridges, Branches disorganized and bushy, the twigs medium-sized, minutely hairy when green becoming hairless when older. Sap milky. Leaves alternate, 1.5-7" (4-18 cm) long, ovate, ranging from deeply lobed to unlobed (more lobed or saplings or shoots in full sun). Lobes have blunt tips, and the sinuses do not have teeth. Surface somewhat glossy above. usually with few to no hairs but sometimes rough-hairy when young; the underside has hairs only along some of the main veins, especially in their angles. Secondary veins slightly depressed above, two major ones emanating from the base; veinlets are flat or nearly so. Margins toothed. Petioles 15-30% of blade length. Flowers (spring) wind-pollinated, the male and female separate, on the same trees or on separate trees, tiny, greenish white. in hanging catkins. Berry an elongated cluster of tiny fruitlets packed together, 0.5-1" (13-25 mm), ripening to purple-black (occasionally red, pink, or white) in early to mid summer. CONFUSING PLANTS: Easy to identify, but because people get confused by its name this is the most mis. identified tree in North America. HABITAT: A pioneer or weed tree of roadsides, old fields, vacant urban lots, parks, brushy áreas, forest edges, and young woods. Thrives on rich soil. Introduced. I FOOD USE: Gather berries from the branches by hand or shake them onto a tarp or cloth. They can be dried, eaten fresh, or used in jams, jellies, pies, juice, or ice cream. Young leaves, especially on stump sprouts, can be eaten as a cooked green and have been traditionally dried and powdered as a flour additive. Note: the warnings sometimes seen about mulberry sap being hallucinogenic seem overblown and irrelevant to normal food use. COMMENTS: This is the weedy mulberry familiar to most people, especially in the northern states where it abounds in urban and agricultural landscapes. The ill-conceived names "white mulberry" and Morus alba were given based upon aberrant, unpigmented cultivars. The white-fruited feral descendants of these cultivars invasive are sometimes found, but purple-black is the normal color of the fruit. This is by far the most abundant tree in our region, but because so many professionals confuse it with the White mulberry fruit normally native mulberry it has been largely ignored in the discussion and manage- ripens to dark purple. ment of invasive plants. AKA white mulberry. Close-up of the midvein underside. 47 White-fruited abberation of Morus alba. 