PLANTS WITH FRUIT COMPOSED OF MULTIPLE
GROUP 3 PLANTS WITH FRUIT COMPOSED OF
MULTIPLE SMALL FRUITLETS
of the safest groups for beginning foragers-there is nothing dangerous or semi-woody, that closely
This is one species. The plants in this group may be herbaceous, woody, All but the
resembles any of these tiny one-seeded fruitlets packed together to form a brambles-long-lived larger berry.
but all have belong multiple to the genus Rubus. Most species in this group are the first
mulberries perennials with canes that live only two years. Canes reach their full height stems year
1
without branching (these are called primocanes) then harden into semi-woody
that persist through one winter. The following spring they grow short branches
that bear flowers and fruit, after which they die.
Brambles are probably our most popular wild foods, and are
collected annually by many millions of people. When fully ripe
they spoil quickly and so require rapid freezing or processing.
Piling them too deep in your pail will crush them and hasten
spoilage. All brambles are delicious for eating out of hand
and make superb jams, jellies, pies, and juice. If you want to
make fruit leather from any of these species, mix them at the
ratio of one-third crushed berry pulp to two-thirds applesauce before
drying-this will give your leather some body while retaining the distinct
flavor of your bramble berry. All of them store well frozen or canned in
a water bath. Seeds can be removed with a Victorio-type fruit strainer.
The young tender primocane shoots of the larger brambles are edible in
spring; peel off their tough, bitter skin by hand and crunch them raw as a
refreshing treat.
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 3
The key is not your final answer!
Trees; fruit with no calyx hangs on a limp stalk.-
Leaves less than 8" (20 cm) long, smoothish and glossy above, hairs only along major veins
below, lobes (if present) blunt.
or
1. Asian mulberry
Leaves often exceeding 8" (20 cm), sandpapery-rough above, hairs evenly distributed on all
veinlets below, lobes (if present) with acuminate tips.
Semi-woody canes or prickly/bristly creepers; fruit with a 5-lobed calyx.
2. American mulberry
Fruit detaches from the receptacle when ripe, and has a thimble-cavity.
Leaves simple, lobed.
or
Flowers purple.
Flowers white,
3. Purple-flowered raspberry
or
Leaves compound.
4. Thimbleberry
or
prickles. Primocane leaves often with 5 leaflets,
Stem and petiole covered with long, stiff bristles, shorter glandular hairs, but no stout
prickles. Stem and petiole densely covered with long, gland-tipped hairs and scattered stout
5. Red raspberry
Primocane leaves with 3 leaflets.
Fruits remain attached to the receptacle when ripe; not thimble-like.
Stem smooth, hairless, bloom-coated, with scattered broad-based prickles.
6. Wineberry
7. Black raspberry
Large upright to arching canes with broad-based prickles,
Trailing or limp low canes, armored with small prickles or spines,
B. Blackberry
Herbaceous Leaf plants with unarmed stems; fruit with a 5-lobed calyx,
9, Dewberry
simple and lobed, fruit ripens yellowish.
Leaf ternately compound; fruit ripens reddish.
Leaf tip acute-pointed, flowers white.
10. Cloudberry
Leaf-tip obtuse, flowers pink.
11. Plumboy
12. Nagoonberry
46
PLANTS WITH FRUIT COMPOSED OF MULTIPLE GROUP 3 PLANTS WITH FRUIT COMPOSED OF MULTIPLE SMALL FRUITLETS of the safest groups for beginning foragers-there is nothing dangerous or semi-woody, that closely This is one species. The plants in this group may be herbaceous, woody, All but the resembles any of these tiny one-seeded fruitlets packed together to form a brambles-long-lived larger berry. but all have belong multiple to the genus Rubus. Most species in this group are the first mulberries perennials with canes that live only two years. Canes reach their full height stems year 1 without branching (these are called primocanes) then harden into semi-woody that persist through one winter. The following spring they grow short branches that bear flowers and fruit, after which they die. Brambles are probably our most popular wild foods, and are collected annually by many millions of people. When fully ripe they spoil quickly and so require rapid freezing or processing. Piling them too deep in your pail will crush them and hasten spoilage. All brambles are delicious for eating out of hand and make superb jams, jellies, pies, and juice. If you want to make fruit leather from any of these species, mix them at the ratio of one-third crushed berry pulp to two-thirds applesauce before drying-this will give your leather some body while retaining the distinct flavor of your bramble berry. All of them store well frozen or canned in a water bath. Seeds can be removed with a Victorio-type fruit strainer. The young tender primocane shoots of the larger brambles are edible in spring; peel off their tough, bitter skin by hand and crunch them raw as a refreshing treat. TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 3 The key is not your final answer! Trees; fruit with no calyx hangs on a limp stalk.- Leaves less than 8" (20 cm) long, smoothish and glossy above, hairs only along major veins below, lobes (if present) blunt. or 1. Asian mulberry Leaves often exceeding 8" (20 cm), sandpapery-rough above, hairs evenly distributed on all veinlets below, lobes (if present) with acuminate tips. Semi-woody canes or prickly/bristly creepers; fruit with a 5-lobed calyx. 2. American mulberry Fruit detaches from the receptacle when ripe, and has a thimble-cavity. Leaves simple, lobed. or Flowers purple. Flowers white, 3. Purple-flowered raspberry or Leaves compound. 4. Thimbleberry or prickles. Primocane leaves often with 5 leaflets, Stem and petiole covered with long, stiff bristles, shorter glandular hairs, but no stout prickles. Stem and petiole densely covered with long, gland-tipped hairs and scattered stout 5. Red raspberry Primocane leaves with 3 leaflets. Fruits remain attached to the receptacle when ripe; not thimble-like. Stem smooth, hairless, bloom-coated, with scattered broad-based prickles. 6. Wineberry 7. Black raspberry Large upright to arching canes with broad-based prickles, Trailing or limp low canes, armored with small prickles or spines, B. Blackberry Herbaceous Leaf plants with unarmed stems; fruit with a 5-lobed calyx, 9, Dewberry simple and lobed, fruit ripens yellowish. Leaf ternately compound; fruit ripens reddish. Leaf tip acute-pointed, flowers white. 10. Cloudberry Leaf-tip obtuse, flowers pink. 11. Plumboy 12. Nagoonberry 46 