PLANTS WITH FRUIT COMPOSED OF MULTIPLE SMALL
2 American mulberry
3
3
IWE-231
Morus rubra Moraceae (Mulberry family)
QUICK CHECK: Tree with large. rough leaves and blackberry-like fruit. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Usually a large understory tree but sometimes reaches canopy heights of
90 (27 m). Bark in elongated reddish-brown plates, reminiscent of slippery elm. Branches
are often arranged in flat, horizontal layers. Twigs moderately large, sparse, soft-hairy when
young, becoming hairless. Sap milky. Leaves 3-14" (8-36 cm) long, broadly ovate (in sun)
to heart-shaped (in shade), rough-hairy on the upper surface. finely and evenly soft-hairy on all veins and veinlets
below. rarely lobed on mature trees but deeply lobed on shoots and saplings. Major lobes have acuminate tips.
Blades are highly variable in size, becoming progressively larger toward the branch tip; flat in shade, smaller
and folded in full sun. Veins, including the veinlets, are deeply depressed, and the blades are often pleated along
major veins, which sometimes terminate in an extra-large, extended tooth. Margins serrated; there are often
large teeth inside the sinuses. Petioles 5-15% of blade length. Flowers (spring) wind-pollinated, not showy,
male and female separate, sometimes on the same tree, hanging in catkins. Berry an elongated cluster of tiny
fruitlets packed together, 0.6-1.8" (1.5-4.6 cm) long, often curved, ripening to purple in early to mid summer.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Basswood (p. 119) leaves are hairless and asymmetrical with longer petioles.
HABITAT: Hardwood forests on rich soil, especially small floodplains, valleys, and steep slopes. Highly
associated with limestone and pawpaw. More of a generalist in the Deep South. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather ripe berries ID early summer.
These are larger and better tasting than those of
Asian mulberry. Tender young shoots and leaves are
excellent raw or cooked. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: American mulberry is strikingly beau-
tiful and elegant, decidedly unlike its weedy cousin.
The leaf's astounding resemblance to basswood
may partly account for this tree remaining largely
unknown (it was actually re-described in a botanical
journal as a "newly discovered species" in 2009), but
the misapplication of its name to Asian mulberry is
the bigger problem. I have seen people confuse Morus
rubra with basswood and slippery eim, but never with
Morus alba. Unfortunately the native tree is disap-
pearing in many areas due to genetic swamping by
the introduced Asian species. AKA red mulberry.
Close-up of midvein underside.
PLANTS WITH FRUIT COMPOSED OF MULTIPLE SMALL 2 American mulberry 3 3 IWE-231 Morus rubra Moraceae (Mulberry family) QUICK CHECK: Tree with large. rough leaves and blackberry-like fruit. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Usually a large understory tree but sometimes reaches canopy heights of 90 (27 m). Bark in elongated reddish-brown plates, reminiscent of slippery elm. Branches are often arranged in flat, horizontal layers. Twigs moderately large, sparse, soft-hairy when young, becoming hairless. Sap milky. Leaves 3-14" (8-36 cm) long, broadly ovate (in sun) to heart-shaped (in shade), rough-hairy on the upper surface. finely and evenly soft-hairy on all veins and veinlets below. rarely lobed on mature trees but deeply lobed on shoots and saplings. Major lobes have acuminate tips. Blades are highly variable in size, becoming progressively larger toward the branch tip; flat in shade, smaller and folded in full sun. Veins, including the veinlets, are deeply depressed, and the blades are often pleated along major veins, which sometimes terminate in an extra-large, extended tooth. Margins serrated; there are often large teeth inside the sinuses. Petioles 5-15% of blade length. Flowers (spring) wind-pollinated, not showy, male and female separate, sometimes on the same tree, hanging in catkins. Berry an elongated cluster of tiny fruitlets packed together, 0.6-1.8" (1.5-4.6 cm) long, often curved, ripening to purple in early to mid summer. CONFUSING PLANTS: Basswood (p. 119) leaves are hairless and asymmetrical with longer petioles. HABITAT: Hardwood forests on rich soil, especially small floodplains, valleys, and steep slopes. Highly associated with limestone and pawpaw. More of a generalist in the Deep South. Native. FOOD USE: Gather ripe berries ID early summer. These are larger and better tasting than those of Asian mulberry. Tender young shoots and leaves are excellent raw or cooked. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: American mulberry is strikingly beau- tiful and elegant, decidedly unlike its weedy cousin. The leaf's astounding resemblance to basswood may partly account for this tree remaining largely unknown (it was actually re-described in a botanical journal as a "newly discovered species" in 2009), but the misapplication of its name to Asian mulberry is the bigger problem. I have seen people confuse Morus rubra with basswood and slippery eim, but never with Morus alba. Unfortunately the native tree is disap- pearing in many areas due to genetic swamping by the introduced Asian species. AKA red mulberry. Close-up of midvein underside. 