OF
3 Purple-flowered raspberry
2
Rubus odoratus
1
IWE-65
Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK rates from CHECK: the Large, simple, maple-like leaves and a broad, reddish harry that sapa
receptacle; unarmed. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: (60-180 Perennial spreading by rhizomes. Canes erect to slightly
the surface cm) tall, never rooting at the tips, zigzag, lacking thorns or spines, faintly arching, 2-5'
older glandular-sticky on primocanes becoming gray-brown and exfoliating ridged,
canes. Leaves simple, 4-8" (10-20 cm) wide and about equally long, the base or
notched; 3 or 5 sharp palmate lobes. Both surfaces have at least a few fine, soft hairs deeply but
these toothed. are denser and longer on the veins beneath. Veins and veinlets deeply depressed above. Margins fine
clusters, one or a few blooming at a time. Flowers 1.3-1.8"
Petioles 40-70% of blade length, covered with glandular hairs. Inflorescence small to large branch ng /
(33-46 mm) across with 5 broad purple petals. Berry light
orange-red when ripe, flattened and broad, 0.5-0.8" (13-20
mm) across, composed of smaller and more numerous
fruitlets than other brambles.
HABITAT: Roadsides, forest borders and openings, rocky
slopes. Native.
FOOD USE: The berries ripen in late summer but are pro-
duced sparsely, making them hard to collect in quantity. They
are rather dry, but the flavor is still good. Primocane shoots
in late spring can be peeled and eaten raw. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Many people call this species "thimbleberry,"
and some deride the fruit as tasteless, but I think they are
secretly just mad they don't get to taste more of it.
Related edible:
4
Thimbleberry
Rubus parviflorus
3
1
IWE-64
This species is nearly identical but has white flowers and juicier fruit. It is less widespread in
our region, but gets more love where it is found. Ripening mostly in August, thimbleberries
are harvested commercially on Michigan's Keeweenaw Peninsula. Thimbleberry is primarily
found in the Mountain West, but there is a disjunct population around the northern Great in
Lakes. It inhabits moist soil in moderate shade to full sun, usually on slopes. Look for it
clearings and along forest edges, roadsides, logging trails, steep woods, and stream banks.
49
Thimbleberry fruit-the fruit of purple-flowered raspberry is identical.
OF 3 Purple-flowered raspberry 2 Rubus odoratus 1 IWE-65 Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK rates from CHECK: the Large, simple, maple-like leaves and a broad, reddish harry that sapa receptacle; unarmed. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: (60-180 Perennial spreading by rhizomes. Canes erect to slightly the surface cm) tall, never rooting at the tips, zigzag, lacking thorns or spines, faintly arching, 2-5' older glandular-sticky on primocanes becoming gray-brown and exfoliating ridged, canes. Leaves simple, 4-8" (10-20 cm) wide and about equally long, the base or notched; 3 or 5 sharp palmate lobes. Both surfaces have at least a few fine, soft hairs deeply but these toothed. are denser and longer on the veins beneath. Veins and veinlets deeply depressed above. Margins fine clusters, one or a few blooming at a time. Flowers 1.3-1.8" Petioles 40-70% of blade length, covered with glandular hairs. Inflorescence small to large branch ng / (33-46 mm) across with 5 broad purple petals. Berry light orange-red when ripe, flattened and broad, 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) across, composed of smaller and more numerous fruitlets than other brambles. HABITAT: Roadsides, forest borders and openings, rocky slopes. Native. FOOD USE: The berries ripen in late summer but are pro- duced sparsely, making them hard to collect in quantity. They are rather dry, but the flavor is still good. Primocane shoots in late spring can be peeled and eaten raw. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Many people call this species "thimbleberry," and some deride the fruit as tasteless, but I think they are secretly just mad they don't get to taste more of it. Related edible: 4 Thimbleberry Rubus parviflorus 3 1 IWE-64 This species is nearly identical but has white flowers and juicier fruit. It is less widespread in our region, but gets more love where it is found. Ripening mostly in August, thimbleberries are harvested commercially on Michigan's Keeweenaw Peninsula. Thimbleberry is primarily found in the Mountain West, but there is a disjunct population around the northern Great in Lakes. It inhabits moist soil in moderate shade to full sun, usually on slopes. Look for it clearings and along forest edges, roadsides, logging trails, steep woods, and stream banks. 49 Thimbleberry fruit-the fruit of purple-flowered raspberry is identical. 