PLANTS
WITH
FRUIT
5 Red raspberry
3
=D
IWE-62
2
Rubus idaeus Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK CHECK: Canes with stiff bristles but no stout prickles; red fruit detaches from
the receptacle. ID difficulty 1. rhizomes to form thickets. Canes erect or arching with but bloom, not
DESCRIPTION: Spreading (60-150 by cm) tall, not angled. the surface sometimes Leaves alternate, most
densely often rooting terminal pinnately covered at leaflet the leafiet. tip. with compound is slightly 2-5' Leaflets stiff bristles, larger with 2-4" 5 than usually (5-10 leaflets the cm) gland-tipped side on wool. long, primocanes; leaflets. ovate, Veins when Petioles deeply sometimes 3 leaflets young. depressed bristly, lobed, on fruiting not coarsely above. channeled, canes. and The and
irregularly about the toothed, length the of
terminal short, broad
the fine Inflorescence a whitish
underside whitish the from flowers a dense opening layer one of at a time. Flowers (early summer) about 0.5" (13 stamens. mm) across, Berry juicy,
with cluster sharp. of 3-12, triangular, gland-hairy sepals, 5 less conspicuous petals, and numerous
red, about 5 as long as wide, detaching from a soft whitish receptacle.
HABITAT: Forest openings, young woods, swamp margins, roadsides, brush. old fields, recently logged areas.
Dry to moist soil of most types, in full sun to light shade. Native.
Berries ripen over 5-8 weeks in mid to late summer. These make one of the very best jams, for tea. and
everything FOOD USE: else, too. Peeled shoots are small but good raw. The leaves can be used fresh or dried
Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: In our cool northern forests this is often the most abundant wild berry. The stems and leaves
are a major food source for hares, rabbits, moose, and deer. Because red raspberries ripen over a long period
their crop is less susceptible to weather vagaries. Where their ranges overlap, red and black raspberries
frequently hybridize, and these hybrids are just as delicious as they sound.
50
PLANTS WITH FRUIT 5 Red raspberry 3 =D IWE-62 2 Rubus idaeus Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK CHECK: Canes with stiff bristles but no stout prickles; red fruit detaches from the receptacle. ID difficulty 1. rhizomes to form thickets. Canes erect or arching with but bloom, not DESCRIPTION: Spreading (60-150 by cm) tall, not angled. the surface sometimes Leaves alternate, most densely often rooting terminal pinnately covered at leaflet the leafiet. tip. with compound is slightly 2-5' Leaflets stiff bristles, larger with 2-4" 5 than usually (5-10 leaflets the cm) gland-tipped side on wool. long, primocanes; leaflets. ovate, Veins when Petioles deeply sometimes 3 leaflets young. depressed bristly, lobed, on fruiting not coarsely above. channeled, canes. and The and irregularly about the toothed, length the of terminal short, broad the fine Inflorescence a whitish underside whitish the from flowers a dense opening layer one of at a time. Flowers (early summer) about 0.5" (13 stamens. mm) across, Berry juicy, with cluster sharp. of 3-12, triangular, gland-hairy sepals, 5 less conspicuous petals, and numerous red, about 5 as long as wide, detaching from a soft whitish receptacle. HABITAT: Forest openings, young woods, swamp margins, roadsides, brush. old fields, recently logged areas. Dry to moist soil of most types, in full sun to light shade. Native. Berries ripen over 5-8 weeks in mid to late summer. These make one of the very best jams, for tea. and everything FOOD USE: else, too. Peeled shoots are small but good raw. The leaves can be used fresh or dried Conservation 1. COMMENTS: In our cool northern forests this is often the most abundant wild berry. The stems and leaves are a major food source for hares, rabbits, moose, and deer. Because red raspberries ripen over a long period their crop is less susceptible to weather vagaries. Where their ranges overlap, red and black raspberries frequently hybridize, and these hybrids are just as delicious as they sound. 50 