6
Wineberry
3
2
IWE-66
Rubus phoenicolasius
Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK CHECK: Canes with stout prickles and densely avarad with
3 leaflets; red fruit that detaches from the receptar le ID difficulty 1,
DESCRIPTION: Stems arching, round, purple, to 7 (2.1 m) tall. densely covered with
long, reddish, gland-tipped hairs and scattered stout prickles Leaves alternate, ternately
compound. Leaflets 1-4" (2.5-10 cm), the side leaflets ovate; the end leaflet is almost as
broad as long and much larger than the side leaflets. Blades are sparse-hairy above. NOOL
A
coated and silvery beneath; the veins often show red. Veins above are strongly depressed
Pagidly
Margins coarsely double-toothed, the terminal leaflet often lobed. Inflorescence (late spring to ear' 3000
mer) panicles of 8-35, a few blooming at a time. Flowers have 5 long, acuminate pointed sepals, extremely
glandular-hairy, cupped, the tips often twisted, wrapped over the developing fruit. Petals 5. broad. creased.
folded inward over the numerous stamens in the center. Berries (early to mid summer) juicy and reddish. sticky
without bloom, and detach easily from the yellow-orange receptacle.
HABITAT: Well-drained moist soil in partial sun; forest edges, dis-
turbed woods, roadsides. Introduced. I
FOOD USE: Berries are excellent for all the uses of blackberries and
raspberries, and the large clusters make them easy to collect. The
shoots are edible and peel easily.
COMMENTS: Perhaps no exotic invasive plant is so well liked as
this delicious berry, always popular with pickers wherever it is found.
6 Wineberry 3 2 IWE-66 Rubus phoenicolasius Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK CHECK: Canes with stout prickles and densely avarad with 3 leaflets; red fruit that detaches from the receptar le ID difficulty 1, DESCRIPTION: Stems arching, round, purple, to 7 (2.1 m) tall. densely covered with long, reddish, gland-tipped hairs and scattered stout prickles Leaves alternate, ternately compound. Leaflets 1-4" (2.5-10 cm), the side leaflets ovate; the end leaflet is almost as broad as long and much larger than the side leaflets. Blades are sparse-hairy above. NOOL A coated and silvery beneath; the veins often show red. Veins above are strongly depressed Pagidly Margins coarsely double-toothed, the terminal leaflet often lobed. Inflorescence (late spring to ear' 3000 mer) panicles of 8-35, a few blooming at a time. Flowers have 5 long, acuminate pointed sepals, extremely glandular-hairy, cupped, the tips often twisted, wrapped over the developing fruit. Petals 5. broad. creased. folded inward over the numerous stamens in the center. Berries (early to mid summer) juicy and reddish. sticky without bloom, and detach easily from the yellow-orange receptacle. HABITAT: Well-drained moist soil in partial sun; forest edges, dis- turbed woods, roadsides. Introduced. I FOOD USE: Berries are excellent for all the uses of blackberries and raspberries, and the large clusters make them easy to collect. The shoots are edible and peel easily. COMMENTS: Perhaps no exotic invasive plant is so well liked as this delicious berry, always popular with pickers wherever it is found. 