PLANTS WITH FRUIT COMPOSED OF MULTIPLE SMALL FRUITLETS
Black raspberry
3
3
IWE-63
7
Rubus occidentalis Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK CHECK Bloom-coated arching stems with scattered prickles, rooting at the tip;
black trust that detaches from the receptacle. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by tip-rooting canes. Canes arching, 4-10' (1.2-3 m)
long green or purple with a thick white bloom, smooth and hairless between the scat-
tered broad-based prickles. Leaves alternate, ternately compound (rarely 5 leaflets on
primocanes) the side leaflets sessile but the terminal long-stalked. Petioles prickly,
This map
not channeled. about equal to blade length. Leaflets 1.5-4.5" (3.8-11 cm), roughly ovate
includes
with irregularly toothed margins, occasionally lobed, the terminal leaflet largest. Blades
the western
nearly hairless above with depressed veins, whitish beneath from a fine woolly coating.
counterpart,
Inflorescence a short, broad cluster of 5-12. Flowers with 5 long, pointed, cupped sepals
R. leucodermis.
and 5 smaller blunt, oval, white petals. Berry black when ripe, bloom-coated, 0.3-0.6"
(8-15 mm) across, detaching from the white receptacle.
HABITAT: Dry or well-drained soil in full to partial sun. Likes sand and dislikes clay. Roadsides, forest edges,
savannahs, old fields, fencerows, vacant lots, pastures. Native.
FOOD USE: Berries ripen more uniformly than red raspberries, and this, coupled with their more clustered
nature, makes it possible to collect them faster. They are less acidic than red raspberries, and I think they are
better for pie or snacking, but not as good for jam (although still great). The shoots peel easier than those of
other brambles, and in my opinion taste the best. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: The first jam Lever made, and still one of my favorites. This is possibly the most popular wild
berry in North America. Regularly hybridizes with red raspberry. AKA black cap.
52
PLANTS WITH FRUIT COMPOSED OF MULTIPLE SMALL FRUITLETS Black raspberry 3 3 IWE-63 7 Rubus occidentalis Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK CHECK Bloom-coated arching stems with scattered prickles, rooting at the tip; black trust that detaches from the receptacle. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by tip-rooting canes. Canes arching, 4-10' (1.2-3 m) long green or purple with a thick white bloom, smooth and hairless between the scat- tered broad-based prickles. Leaves alternate, ternately compound (rarely 5 leaflets on primocanes) the side leaflets sessile but the terminal long-stalked. Petioles prickly, This map not channeled. about equal to blade length. Leaflets 1.5-4.5" (3.8-11 cm), roughly ovate includes with irregularly toothed margins, occasionally lobed, the terminal leaflet largest. Blades the western nearly hairless above with depressed veins, whitish beneath from a fine woolly coating. counterpart, Inflorescence a short, broad cluster of 5-12. Flowers with 5 long, pointed, cupped sepals R. leucodermis. and 5 smaller blunt, oval, white petals. Berry black when ripe, bloom-coated, 0.3-0.6" (8-15 mm) across, detaching from the white receptacle. HABITAT: Dry or well-drained soil in full to partial sun. Likes sand and dislikes clay. Roadsides, forest edges, savannahs, old fields, fencerows, vacant lots, pastures. Native. FOOD USE: Berries ripen more uniformly than red raspberries, and this, coupled with their more clustered nature, makes it possible to collect them faster. They are less acidic than red raspberries, and I think they are better for pie or snacking, but not as good for jam (although still great). The shoots peel easier than those of other brambles, and in my opinion taste the best. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: The first jam Lever made, and still one of my favorites. This is possibly the most popular wild berry in North America. Regularly hybridizes with red raspberry. AKA black cap. 52 