0
1cm
PLANTS WITH FRUIT COMPOSED OF MULTIPLE SMALL FRUITLETS
8
Blackberry
3
3
IWE-60
genus Rubus (numerous species) Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK and CHECK: Brambles with ridged stems, wide prickles, palmately
racemes of purple-black berries clinging to the ID difficulty 1,
DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by root suckers. Canes 2-8' (60-240cm) tall,
arching but not rooting at the tip, up to 1" (2,5 cm) thick, ridged and angled, with formidable, erect to
curved, broad-based prickles. The surface is green to purplish on primocanes,
from hairless to sparsely hairy with some hairs glandular. Leaves alternate, those ranging of
mocanes palmately compound with 5 leaflets, the 2 proximal leaflets smaller and on pri very short
larger distal leaflets 3-6" (8-15 cm) long. Leaves of mature canes usually have 3 leaflets. Theupper betioles the
thinly hairy with depressed secondary veins; lower surface densely soft-hairy but still green Margins surface serrated
but not lobed. Petioles about equal to the longer leaflets and prickly, Inflorescence a panicle of 1-32 owers
each on a long stalk. Flowers (early summer) about 0.7" (18 mm) across, with 5 sharp triangular sepals and
5 broad white petals, with numerous dark-tipped stamens. Berries often longer than wide, ripen to purple-
black in mid to late summer, and cling to the receptacle.
HABITAT: Open woods, forest edges, old fields, and brushy areas in full to partial sun; on almost any weil
drained soil. Native.
FOOD USE: Berries can be collected faster than any other bramble berry. This is why we like to make urce
from them. Their biggest drawback is the large seeds, but these can be removed by straining. Shoots are
edible but slightly astringent and harder to peel than those of other brambles. Tufted shoots are a special zed
structure that appears on the common blackberry Rubus allegheniensis (and possibly other species) in response
to cutting or browsing of the regular shoots in early summer. These are thin, flimsy, and densely packed along
the rhizome; they lack prickles and have ternate leaves only. A few weeks after forming they wilt rapidly and
die, usually succumbing to an orange blight. They are tender and delicious raw if you get them young enough.
lacking the normal astringency of blackberry shoots, and do not need to be peeled. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is one of the most popular wild berries in North America. Few humans have noticed that
the tufted shoots are delicious-but the deer know all about them. They are a forager's gem.
tutted blas kberry shouls
53
0 1cm PLANTS WITH FRUIT COMPOSED OF MULTIPLE SMALL FRUITLETS 8 Blackberry 3 3 IWE-60 genus Rubus (numerous species) Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK and CHECK: Brambles with ridged stems, wide prickles, palmately racemes of purple-black berries clinging to the ID difficulty 1, DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by root suckers. Canes 2-8' (60-240cm) tall, arching but not rooting at the tip, up to 1" (2,5 cm) thick, ridged and angled, with formidable, erect to curved, broad-based prickles. The surface is green to purplish on primocanes, from hairless to sparsely hairy with some hairs glandular. Leaves alternate, those ranging of mocanes palmately compound with 5 leaflets, the 2 proximal leaflets smaller and on pri very short larger distal leaflets 3-6" (8-15 cm) long. Leaves of mature canes usually have 3 leaflets. Theupper betioles the thinly hairy with depressed secondary veins; lower surface densely soft-hairy but still green Margins surface serrated but not lobed. Petioles about equal to the longer leaflets and prickly, Inflorescence a panicle of 1-32 owers each on a long stalk. Flowers (early summer) about 0.7" (18 mm) across, with 5 sharp triangular sepals and 5 broad white petals, with numerous dark-tipped stamens. Berries often longer than wide, ripen to purple- black in mid to late summer, and cling to the receptacle. HABITAT: Open woods, forest edges, old fields, and brushy areas in full to partial sun; on almost any weil drained soil. Native. FOOD USE: Berries can be collected faster than any other bramble berry. This is why we like to make urce from them. Their biggest drawback is the large seeds, but these can be removed by straining. Shoots are edible but slightly astringent and harder to peel than those of other brambles. Tufted shoots are a special zed structure that appears on the common blackberry Rubus allegheniensis (and possibly other species) in response to cutting or browsing of the regular shoots in early summer. These are thin, flimsy, and densely packed along the rhizome; they lack prickles and have ternate leaves only. A few weeks after forming they wilt rapidly and die, usually succumbing to an orange blight. They are tender and delicious raw if you get them young enough. lacking the normal astringency of blackberry shoots, and do not need to be peeled. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is one of the most popular wild berries in North America. Few humans have noticed that the tufted shoots are delicious-but the deer know all about them. They are a forager's gem. tutted blas kberry shouls 53 