PLANTS WITH FRUIT COMPOSED OF MULTIPLE SMALL FRUITLETS
9 Dewberry
3
IWE-61
genus Rubus (numerous species) Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK CHECK Trailing or creeping stems with small, blackberry-like fruit in small
consters ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: These are essentially small, low blackberries with trailing, creeping, or
decumbent stems that root at the nodes. Canes have hairs, spines, or prickles and are
variably hairy Leaves of primocanes are ternately compound or palmately compound
with 5 leafiets (depending on the species); leaves of mature canes have 3 leaflets. Leaf-
lets ovate. obovate. or lanceolate; occasionally lobed. with sharp tips and toothed margins.
The surfaces of most species are sparsely hairy. Secondary veins are distinctly depressed above. Flowers in
clusters of 3-12, with 5 sharp green sepals and 5 broad white petals. Berries are like miniature blackberries
with fewer fruitlets. clinging to the receptacle when ripe.
HABITAT: Various habitats, mostly in full sun, especially in sandy, moist soils. Native.
FOOD USE: Berries ripen in summer and are delicious fresh or in various desserts. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Dew-
berries generally
taste like black-
berries and can be
used in the same
ways only they are
smaller, sparser,
and harder to get
in quantity. On
average the flavor
is at least as good.
There are dozens of
species in our area.
54
PLANTS WITH FRUIT COMPOSED OF MULTIPLE SMALL FRUITLETS 9 Dewberry 3 IWE-61 genus Rubus (numerous species) Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK CHECK Trailing or creeping stems with small, blackberry-like fruit in small consters ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: These are essentially small, low blackberries with trailing, creeping, or decumbent stems that root at the nodes. Canes have hairs, spines, or prickles and are variably hairy Leaves of primocanes are ternately compound or palmately compound with 5 leafiets (depending on the species); leaves of mature canes have 3 leaflets. Leaf- lets ovate. obovate. or lanceolate; occasionally lobed. with sharp tips and toothed margins. The surfaces of most species are sparsely hairy. Secondary veins are distinctly depressed above. Flowers in clusters of 3-12, with 5 sharp green sepals and 5 broad white petals. Berries are like miniature blackberries with fewer fruitlets. clinging to the receptacle when ripe. HABITAT: Various habitats, mostly in full sun, especially in sandy, moist soils. Native. FOOD USE: Berries ripen in summer and are delicious fresh or in various desserts. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Dew- berries generally taste like black- berries and can be used in the same ways only they are smaller, sparser, and harder to get in quantity. On average the flavor is at least as good. There are dozens of species in our area. 54 