WITH FRUIT COMPOSED OF MULTIPLE SMALL FRUITLETS
10 Cloudberry
3
IWE-68
Rubus chamaemorus
Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK CHECK: Low, palmately lobed, ruffled, leathery leaves and large.
berries composed of a few large fruitlets. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Low, erect, herbaceous plant spreading by rhizomes. Stems 2-12'
(5-30 cm) tall, unarmed, smooth and faintly hairy with 1-3 leaves. If the plant has 2 leaves,
they usually rise to the same level. Leaves alternate, simple, 2-4" (5-10 cm) wide and about
equally long, tough and stiff, palmate with 3-7 (usually 5) lobes. The blades are dark green
or purplish (the latter especially in full sun, and on the margins), ruffled, folded along the strongly depressed
major veins, and cupped or funnel-like-smaller and more ruffled in the sun, larger and more cupped the
shade. The surface is hairless above but hairy along the veins below. Margins serrated and finely hairy
Petioles 80-100% of blade length. Flowers (early summer) borne singly on long pedicels, male and 'emale on
separate plants, about 1" (2.5 cm) across with 4 or 5 broad white petals and the same number of ovate, green.
nipple-tipped sepals. Berry 0.4-0.7" (1-1.8 cm) across, held on an erect stem above the leaves, composed of
only 3-18 large fruitlets, ripening to straw-yellow and very soft in late summer, easily detaching when ripe but
the tiny receptacle remains embedded between the fruitlets.
HABITAT: Acidic soil with high organic content, in full to partial sunlight. Sphagnum moss with black spruce.
in muskegs and upland tundra. Native.
FOOD USE: The berries get lighter, not darker, as they ripen. They can be used in almost any fruity desser!
to great effect. Or just go out in the bog and stuff your face. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: The species name chamaemorus means "ground mulberry." This is one of the iconic wild foods
of the Far North, found around the globe in forest and tundra regions. Although the berries are sparsely
produced, cloudberries are highly esteemed for their unique delicious flavor. AKA bakeapple. This name is
not a reference to the flavor; it is a corruption of the French baie q'appelle, which means "whatchacallit berry."
WITH FRUIT COMPOSED OF MULTIPLE SMALL FRUITLETS 10 Cloudberry 3 IWE-68 Rubus chamaemorus Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK CHECK: Low, palmately lobed, ruffled, leathery leaves and large. berries composed of a few large fruitlets. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Low, erect, herbaceous plant spreading by rhizomes. Stems 2-12' (5-30 cm) tall, unarmed, smooth and faintly hairy with 1-3 leaves. If the plant has 2 leaves, they usually rise to the same level. Leaves alternate, simple, 2-4" (5-10 cm) wide and about equally long, tough and stiff, palmate with 3-7 (usually 5) lobes. The blades are dark green or purplish (the latter especially in full sun, and on the margins), ruffled, folded along the strongly depressed major veins, and cupped or funnel-like-smaller and more ruffled in the sun, larger and more cupped the shade. The surface is hairless above but hairy along the veins below. Margins serrated and finely hairy Petioles 80-100% of blade length. Flowers (early summer) borne singly on long pedicels, male and 'emale on separate plants, about 1" (2.5 cm) across with 4 or 5 broad white petals and the same number of ovate, green. nipple-tipped sepals. Berry 0.4-0.7" (1-1.8 cm) across, held on an erect stem above the leaves, composed of only 3-18 large fruitlets, ripening to straw-yellow and very soft in late summer, easily detaching when ripe but the tiny receptacle remains embedded between the fruitlets. HABITAT: Acidic soil with high organic content, in full to partial sunlight. Sphagnum moss with black spruce. in muskegs and upland tundra. Native. FOOD USE: The berries get lighter, not darker, as they ripen. They can be used in almost any fruity desser! to great effect. Or just go out in the bog and stuff your face. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: The species name chamaemorus means "ground mulberry." This is one of the iconic wild foods of the Far North, found around the globe in forest and tundra regions. Although the berries are sparsely produced, cloudberries are highly esteemed for their unique delicious flavor. AKA bakeapple. This name is not a reference to the flavor; it is a corruption of the French baie q'appelle, which means "whatchacallit berry." 