03
11
Plumboy
3
[] IWE-67
Rubus pubescens
Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK CHECK: Unarmed trailing bramble with 3-part compound leaves, red fruit not
separating from the receptacle. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Low herbaceous bramble with two types of stems: long, creeping, thread-
like ones by which the plant spreads, and short, erect, fruiting stems arising periodically
from nodes along the creeping stem. Erect stems to 12" (30 cm) tall, hairy, with no thorns or
prickles. Leaves alternate, few, ternately compound, on long thin petioles 120% of terminal
leaflet length. Leaflets sessile or nearly so, light green, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, ovate to lanceolate, sharp-tipped,
hairless to faintly hairy on both sides. Major veins are deeply depressed above; veinlets scarcely so. Margins
are toothed and occasionally lobed. Inflorescence single flowers or loose clusters of up to 4, with thin pedicels
rising above the leaves. Flowers have 5 sharp, lanceolate, reflexed sepals and 5 broad-tipped white petals held
almost erect. Berries composed of few fruitlets, ripening to burgundy-red and adhering to the receptacle.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Often confused with woodland strawberry (p. 298) when not in fruit, and nagoon-
berry when fruiting.
HABITAT: Conifer or broadleaf forests in moderate to light shade, especially where the soil is moist. Often
thrives under aspen. Native.
FOOD USE: Berries ripen in early summer and are delicious but hard to collect in quantity. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This uniquely delicious berry ripens earlier than any other bramble in its range, concurrent
with wild strawberry. The plant is often very common but the fruit is produced sparingly. This widespread
and abundant berry has no widely accepted common name. AKA dwarf raspberry.
56
03 11 Plumboy 3 [] IWE-67 Rubus pubescens Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK CHECK: Unarmed trailing bramble with 3-part compound leaves, red fruit not separating from the receptacle. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Low herbaceous bramble with two types of stems: long, creeping, thread- like ones by which the plant spreads, and short, erect, fruiting stems arising periodically from nodes along the creeping stem. Erect stems to 12" (30 cm) tall, hairy, with no thorns or prickles. Leaves alternate, few, ternately compound, on long thin petioles 120% of terminal leaflet length. Leaflets sessile or nearly so, light green, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, ovate to lanceolate, sharp-tipped, hairless to faintly hairy on both sides. Major veins are deeply depressed above; veinlets scarcely so. Margins are toothed and occasionally lobed. Inflorescence single flowers or loose clusters of up to 4, with thin pedicels rising above the leaves. Flowers have 5 sharp, lanceolate, reflexed sepals and 5 broad-tipped white petals held almost erect. Berries composed of few fruitlets, ripening to burgundy-red and adhering to the receptacle. CONFUSING PLANTS: Often confused with woodland strawberry (p. 298) when not in fruit, and nagoon- berry when fruiting. HABITAT: Conifer or broadleaf forests in moderate to light shade, especially where the soil is moist. Often thrives under aspen. Native. FOOD USE: Berries ripen in early summer and are delicious but hard to collect in quantity. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This uniquely delicious berry ripens earlier than any other bramble in its range, concurrent with wild strawberry. The plant is often very common but the fruit is produced sparingly. This widespread and abundant berry has no widely accepted common name. AKA dwarf raspberry. 56 