12 Nagoonberry
3 U IWE-67
Rubus arcticus + Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK red fruit CHECK: Low, unarmed plant with large purplish flowers and 1 blunt leaflets
ripening in late summer. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Low bramble forming colonies by stolons. Stems erect, thin,
unbranched, herbaceous, 5-12" (13-30 cm), maroon, unarmed, finely hairy. Each usually
bears only 1-4 leaves and usually 1 flower or fruit. Leaves alternate, ternately stem
on stiff, tough, maroon, hairy petioles 110-180% of the terminal leaflet, deeper compound, than wide
with a narrow channel, the lowest petioles scarcely diverging from the stem. Leaflets broad with blunt
occasionally lobed, dark green, scarcely hairy, tough; those in shade are flat and somewhat glossy tips
depressed veins; those in full sun have dark purple highlights and are folded along the midvein and with
depressed at every major vein to give a ruffled appearance. Side leaflets are sessile, asymmetrical, usually deeply
with 3 (sometimes 5) lobes. End leaflets are obovate, with petiolules 3-5% of blade length. Flowers (summer)
single, about 1.5" (4 cm) across, sepals narrow and pointed, the 5-8 petals elliptic, pink-purple. narrow at the
base, often twisted. Berries hemispherical, 9-14 mm in diameter, composed of large, plump fruitlets adhering
to the receptacle, ripening to red in late summer, borne above the leaves.
HABITAT: Moist soil in full to partial sun; stream and river banks, muskegs, arctic meadows, swamps
FOOD USE: Berries ripen in late summer and are slow to gather, but worth it. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: A common and very widespread berry of the North, found also across similar habitats n
Eurasia. This berry has good flavor and is among the most coveted treats of the tundra. AKA arctic plumboy,
arctic raspberry, Rubus acaulis.
57
12 Nagoonberry 3 U IWE-67 Rubus arcticus + Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK red fruit CHECK: Low, unarmed plant with large purplish flowers and 1 blunt leaflets ripening in late summer. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Low bramble forming colonies by stolons. Stems erect, thin, unbranched, herbaceous, 5-12" (13-30 cm), maroon, unarmed, finely hairy. Each usually bears only 1-4 leaves and usually 1 flower or fruit. Leaves alternate, ternately stem on stiff, tough, maroon, hairy petioles 110-180% of the terminal leaflet, deeper compound, than wide with a narrow channel, the lowest petioles scarcely diverging from the stem. Leaflets broad with blunt occasionally lobed, dark green, scarcely hairy, tough; those in shade are flat and somewhat glossy tips depressed veins; those in full sun have dark purple highlights and are folded along the midvein and with depressed at every major vein to give a ruffled appearance. Side leaflets are sessile, asymmetrical, usually deeply with 3 (sometimes 5) lobes. End leaflets are obovate, with petiolules 3-5% of blade length. Flowers (summer) single, about 1.5" (4 cm) across, sepals narrow and pointed, the 5-8 petals elliptic, pink-purple. narrow at the base, often twisted. Berries hemispherical, 9-14 mm in diameter, composed of large, plump fruitlets adhering to the receptacle, ripening to red in late summer, borne above the leaves. HABITAT: Moist soil in full to partial sun; stream and river banks, muskegs, arctic meadows, swamps FOOD USE: Berries ripen in late summer and are slow to gather, but worth it. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: A common and very widespread berry of the North, found also across similar habitats n Eurasia. This berry has good flavor and is among the most coveted treats of the tundra. AKA arctic plumboy, arctic raspberry, Rubus acaulis. 57 