IRWE
NEEDLE-LEAVED TREES AND SHRUBS
GROUP 4 NEEDLE-LEAVED TREES AND SHRUBS
Large coniferous trees in our region produce food of several types: cambium, of
inner bark, tender spring branch tips, and immature cones. The needles
several can also be used to steep a tea. None of our pines produce nuts,
however. Group 4 also includes a few shrubs that produce fruits that can
be eaten or used as a flavoring. Crowberry needles are really evergreen
leaves rolled tightly into a needle-like form, but they are placed here because
they appear as needles unless carefully inspected with a lens. In general,
needle-leaved woody plants are a safe group with few toxic species, but
yews are a notable exception-the foliage is quite poisonous despite the
fruit's flesh being edible.
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 4
The key is not your final answer!
Trees.
Needles in wrapped bundles of 2-5.
1. Pine
Needles single, not wrapped in bundles.
Needles short, overlapping, pointed scales pressed against the twig.
& Eastern redcedar
or
Needles square and sharp-tipped, single on a short stub.
2. Spruce
Needles flat, round-tipped, gray-striped below.
Bark smooth with pitch bubbles; top spire-like, stiff, cones erect.
3. Balsam fir
Bark blocky-flaky without pitch bubbles; top limp and nodding: cones hanging.
4. Hemlock
Shrubs.
Seashore shrub with paired, fleshy needles.
5. Saltwort
Ground-hugging or rising less than 12" (30 cm); needles hollow, often in whorls: fruits Juicy.
6. Black crowberry
Shrubs with flat needles, rising 1-10' (0.3-3 m) high.
Needles in whorls of 3, with a stiff, sharp tip and a gray stripe above.
7. Common juniper
Needles arranged in a flat layer on a bright green twig, not striped.
9. Canada yew
1
Pine
1
2
3
genus Pinus
Pinaceae (Pine family)
needles QUICK CHECK: Conifers with broad crowns not tapered to a point, large cones, and
in bundles sheathed at the base. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: and dominant Medium to large trees spreading only by seed. Trunks generally
tufted erect, looking, (but on a few species they are forking or crooked). Crowns straight,
trees is thick widest near or above the middle and not tapered to a point. Bark ragged or
long with ridges, plates, or flakes and variable in color. Needles of mature
wrapped on some in a scaly species; sheath they at may the be base. pointed Pollen or blunt, flexible or brittle. They up to are 18" borne (46 cm) in bundles of
HABITAT: Pines cones are 1-9" (2,5-23 cm) long with thick, rigid scales that bear around a claw-like the bristle base of on the new branch
shoots. Seed cones small and arranged 2-5, each
been historically generally intolerant of shade and dominate in some species.
FOOD USE: Inner prone bark to fire. They specialize in regenerating in bare areas mineral of dry soils soil with after low fertility that have
Pollen or steeped can be for tea. The and flavor cambium is weak (p. unless 30) are a great edible. Needles can be gathered any time burning. of year and Native, A
COMMENTS: freeze for storage, collected and add in early to various summer dishes. by tapping Conservation the quantity male 3/1/1. cones is used; over chopping a container, helps Sift the out flavor insects, steep dry boiled out, or
tea is a fun winter Pine project inner bark for is camping surprisingly children, sweet, and a single tree can provide
much 58 ado about pine pollen as a health supplement but and unlikely a gourmet to impress ingredient. dinner enormous That's guests. a winning There amounts. has combination. lately Pine needle been
IRWE NEEDLE-LEAVED TREES AND SHRUBS GROUP 4 NEEDLE-LEAVED TREES AND SHRUBS Large coniferous trees in our region produce food of several types: cambium, of inner bark, tender spring branch tips, and immature cones. The needles several can also be used to steep a tea. None of our pines produce nuts, however. Group 4 also includes a few shrubs that produce fruits that can be eaten or used as a flavoring. Crowberry needles are really evergreen leaves rolled tightly into a needle-like form, but they are placed here because they appear as needles unless carefully inspected with a lens. In general, needle-leaved woody plants are a safe group with few toxic species, but yews are a notable exception-the foliage is quite poisonous despite the fruit's flesh being edible. TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 4 The key is not your final answer! Trees. Needles in wrapped bundles of 2-5. 1. Pine Needles single, not wrapped in bundles. Needles short, overlapping, pointed scales pressed against the twig. & Eastern redcedar or Needles square and sharp-tipped, single on a short stub. 2. Spruce Needles flat, round-tipped, gray-striped below. Bark smooth with pitch bubbles; top spire-like, stiff, cones erect. 3. Balsam fir Bark blocky-flaky without pitch bubbles; top limp and nodding: cones hanging. 4. Hemlock Shrubs. Seashore shrub with paired, fleshy needles. 5. Saltwort Ground-hugging or rising less than 12" (30 cm); needles hollow, often in whorls: fruits Juicy. 6. Black crowberry Shrubs with flat needles, rising 1-10' (0.3-3 m) high. Needles in whorls of 3, with a stiff, sharp tip and a gray stripe above. 7. Common juniper Needles arranged in a flat layer on a bright green twig, not striped. 9. Canada yew 1 Pine 1 2 3 genus Pinus Pinaceae (Pine family) needles QUICK CHECK: Conifers with broad crowns not tapered to a point, large cones, and in bundles sheathed at the base. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: and dominant Medium to large trees spreading only by seed. Trunks generally tufted erect, looking, (but on a few species they are forking or crooked). Crowns straight, trees is thick widest near or above the middle and not tapered to a point. Bark ragged or long with ridges, plates, or flakes and variable in color. Needles of mature wrapped on some in a scaly species; sheath they at may the be base. pointed Pollen or blunt, flexible or brittle. They up to are 18" borne (46 cm) in bundles of HABITAT: Pines cones are 1-9" (2,5-23 cm) long with thick, rigid scales that bear around a claw-like the bristle base of on the new branch shoots. Seed cones small and arranged 2-5, each been historically generally intolerant of shade and dominate in some species. FOOD USE: Inner prone bark to fire. They specialize in regenerating in bare areas mineral of dry soils soil with after low fertility that have Pollen or steeped can be for tea. The and flavor cambium is weak (p. unless 30) are a great edible. Needles can be gathered any time burning. of year and Native, A COMMENTS: freeze for storage, collected and add in early to various summer dishes. by tapping Conservation the quantity male 3/1/1. cones is used; over chopping a container, helps Sift the out flavor insects, steep dry boiled out, or tea is a fun winter Pine project inner bark for is camping surprisingly children, sweet, and a single tree can provide much 58 ado about pine pollen as a health supplement but and unlikely a gourmet to impress ingredient. dinner enormous That's guests. a winning There amounts. has combination. lately Pine needle been 