1
2
2
2
genus Spruce Picea Pinaceae (Pine family)
QUICK CHECK: Scaly bark and tapered crown, with short, sharp needles on a pedestal.
ID difficulty 1.
Medium to large trees. Trunk erect, single, dominant, straight, broadest with
DESCRIPTION: in annual whorls. Bark gray, thin, covered in fine scales. Crowns narrow,
branches the base and tapered to the top. Needles short, less than 1" (2.5 cm) long, stiff, sharp,
4-sided. less than on 2" (5 cm) long on our native species, but on Norway spruce they may be up to 7" (18 cm) long; of
at borne short stumps or pedestals on all sides of the twig. Seed cones ovoid to cylin-
they drical, hang from upper branches before falling intact (not disintegrating like those of fir), and are composed
numerous thin, flexible scales.
SPECIES: White spruce P. glauca is the most abundant and widespread species, co-dominant over much of
the boreal forest region. This tree of uplands grows tall and straight with slightly ascending and spreading
upper branches. Red spruce P. rubens is a similar species confined to mountain forests of the Northeast.
Black spruce P. mariana is a slender, small, often crooked tree with an extremely narrow crown that grows
primarily in acidic bogs, often in pure stands or associated with white cedar and tamarack. Norway spruce
P. abies is not native but is frequently planted and is locally common as an escape. This spruce has long, often
upcurved lower branches with smaller drooping branchlets; the cones are long and curved.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Balsam fir has flat needies, not on pedestals, and not distributed on all sides of the twigs.
FOOD USE: Inner bark and cambium (p. 30) can be peeled early in the growing season. Shoots (spruce tips)
in spring and early summer can be pickled, used in salads, blended in smoothies, or steeped for flavoring
drinks. Conservation 3/1.
COMMENTS: Spruce tips have become popular in gourmet circles for their tangy and aromatic, but not
overpowering flavor. The pitch of black spruce was once mixed with sugar and raw rubber to make chewing
gum, and collecting the pitch was a minor industry. What is now called "bubblegum flavor" is an imitation
of dried spruce pitch.
White spruce tips
60
White spruce
While spruce
Black spruce
1 2 2 2 genus Spruce Picea Pinaceae (Pine family) QUICK CHECK: Scaly bark and tapered crown, with short, sharp needles on a pedestal. ID difficulty 1. Medium to large trees. Trunk erect, single, dominant, straight, broadest with DESCRIPTION: in annual whorls. Bark gray, thin, covered in fine scales. Crowns narrow, branches the base and tapered to the top. Needles short, less than 1" (2.5 cm) long, stiff, sharp, 4-sided. less than on 2" (5 cm) long on our native species, but on Norway spruce they may be up to 7" (18 cm) long; of at borne short stumps or pedestals on all sides of the twig. Seed cones ovoid to cylin- they drical, hang from upper branches before falling intact (not disintegrating like those of fir), and are composed numerous thin, flexible scales. SPECIES: White spruce P. glauca is the most abundant and widespread species, co-dominant over much of the boreal forest region. This tree of uplands grows tall and straight with slightly ascending and spreading upper branches. Red spruce P. rubens is a similar species confined to mountain forests of the Northeast. Black spruce P. mariana is a slender, small, often crooked tree with an extremely narrow crown that grows primarily in acidic bogs, often in pure stands or associated with white cedar and tamarack. Norway spruce P. abies is not native but is frequently planted and is locally common as an escape. This spruce has long, often upcurved lower branches with smaller drooping branchlets; the cones are long and curved. CONFUSING PLANTS: Balsam fir has flat needies, not on pedestals, and not distributed on all sides of the twigs. FOOD USE: Inner bark and cambium (p. 30) can be peeled early in the growing season. Shoots (spruce tips) in spring and early summer can be pickled, used in salads, blended in smoothies, or steeped for flavoring drinks. Conservation 3/1. COMMENTS: Spruce tips have become popular in gourmet circles for their tangy and aromatic, but not overpowering flavor. The pitch of black spruce was once mixed with sugar and raw rubber to make chewing gum, and collecting the pitch was a minor industry. What is now called "bubblegum flavor" is an imitation of dried spruce pitch. White spruce tips 60 White spruce While spruce Black spruce 