NEEDLE-LEAVED TREES AND SHRUBS
3
Balsam
fir
1
2
Abies balsamea Pinaceae (Pine family)
QUICK CHECK: Conifer with a narrow crown tapering to a sharp top:
blunt. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Medium-sized tree with a narrow crown, widest at the base and taper
ing to a sharp top-the quintessential Christmas tree-to 80' (25 m) tall. Bark relatively
smooth (not scaly) grayish, with large resin blisters; older bark may become irregularly
cracked. Needles 0.5-1.1" (1.3-2.8 cm) long, straight or curving upward, flattened. bluck with a faint granve
down the midvein on the top and a keel below; there is a white-gray strip on each side of the keel Pollen cones
tiny and purplish, clustered around the twigs. Seed cones almost cylindrical but rounded on both ends
(4-8 cm) long, held erect on upper limbs and often crowded, the scales thin, broad, and purplish After matur
ing the cones disintegrate in place: The scales and seeds fall down, leaving just d vertical spike on the branch
CONFUSING PLANTS: Spruce needles are square and sharp-tipped; yew needles have bristle has trici an
whitish lines beneath.
HABITAT: Moist to moderate soil, especially with some clay content; most common in swamo marg no
low ground. tnd
valleys. Balsarr
grows in Fun sun 00
15 extremely shade
tolerant. Native
FOOD USE: Cam-
bium (see D. 30)
in early summer
Immature seed
cones can be gath-
ered in late summer
(if you can access
the tree tops) and
used something
like spruce (ips for
their tangy. piney
aromatic Flavor of
drinks. confections.
or pickles.
COMMENTS:
This is the shade
tolerant climax tree
of the boreal forest
region, and also the
most popular Christ
mas tree in our area.
named for its potent
scent. Individual
needles can persist
no to 13 years. The
needles
are
important writer
road for dees model,
and snowshoe hares.
is
just
little past the tell
her
stage,
NEEDLE-LEAVED TREES AND SHRUBS 3 Balsam fir 1 2 Abies balsamea Pinaceae (Pine family) QUICK CHECK: Conifer with a narrow crown tapering to a sharp top: blunt. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Medium-sized tree with a narrow crown, widest at the base and taper ing to a sharp top-the quintessential Christmas tree-to 80' (25 m) tall. Bark relatively smooth (not scaly) grayish, with large resin blisters; older bark may become irregularly cracked. Needles 0.5-1.1" (1.3-2.8 cm) long, straight or curving upward, flattened. bluck with a faint granve down the midvein on the top and a keel below; there is a white-gray strip on each side of the keel Pollen cones tiny and purplish, clustered around the twigs. Seed cones almost cylindrical but rounded on both ends (4-8 cm) long, held erect on upper limbs and often crowded, the scales thin, broad, and purplish After matur ing the cones disintegrate in place: The scales and seeds fall down, leaving just d vertical spike on the branch CONFUSING PLANTS: Spruce needles are square and sharp-tipped; yew needles have bristle has trici an whitish lines beneath. HABITAT: Moist to moderate soil, especially with some clay content; most common in swamo marg no low ground. tnd valleys. Balsarr grows in Fun sun 00 15 extremely shade tolerant. Native FOOD USE: Cam- bium (see D. 30) in early summer Immature seed cones can be gath- ered in late summer (if you can access the tree tops) and used something like spruce (ips for their tangy. piney aromatic Flavor of drinks. confections. or pickles. COMMENTS: This is the shade tolerant climax tree of the boreal forest region, and also the most popular Christ mas tree in our area. named for its potent scent. Individual needles can persist no to 13 years. The needles are important writer road for dees model, and snowshoe hares. is just little past the tell her stage, 