NEEDLE-LEAVED TREES AND SHRUBS
Saltwort
3
Batis maritima
family Bataceae
CHECK: Trailing shrub of saltwater shallows with non
stems and club-like paired leaves ID difficulty 1.
SCRIPTION: Shrub 1-3' (30-90 cm) tall, often forming dense olonies. Stems long.
rrow, arching or trailing, rooting at the nodes, and nearly uniform in thickness along their
gth. Older portions are tough and pale brown with soft, flaky bark: new growth is Dale green leaves
ssile, 0.8-1.3" (2-3.3 cm) long, succulent, hairless, D-shaped in cross section. blunt pointed. agrees no
and thicker toward the tips, and curved toward the branch tips. Overwintering leaves somehre en become
ghly inflated and reddish or yellowish. Inflorescence numerous axillary spikes, male and female or.
ants, the flowers tiny and whitish. Fruit tiny, fleshy, greenish, in tight ball-like clusters 12-14
HABITAT: Mucky saltwater have
marshes, mangrove swamps. Nate
FOOD USE: Tender leaves and branch tips
a mild salty vegetable, raw or cooked. Conserva
tion 2.
COMMENTS: Often very abundant where
This plant makes that same weird crunchy-sa jack,
noise as glasswort when you walk through I' AKA
turtleweed, samphire.
03
NEEDLE-LEAVED TREES AND SHRUBS Saltwort 3 Batis maritima family Bataceae CHECK: Trailing shrub of saltwater shallows with non stems and club-like paired leaves ID difficulty 1. SCRIPTION: Shrub 1-3' (30-90 cm) tall, often forming dense olonies. Stems long. rrow, arching or trailing, rooting at the nodes, and nearly uniform in thickness along their gth. Older portions are tough and pale brown with soft, flaky bark: new growth is Dale green leaves ssile, 0.8-1.3" (2-3.3 cm) long, succulent, hairless, D-shaped in cross section. blunt pointed. agrees no and thicker toward the tips, and curved toward the branch tips. Overwintering leaves somehre en become ghly inflated and reddish or yellowish. Inflorescence numerous axillary spikes, male and female or. ants, the flowers tiny and whitish. Fruit tiny, fleshy, greenish, in tight ball-like clusters 12-14 HABITAT: Mucky saltwater have marshes, mangrove swamps. Nate FOOD USE: Tender leaves and branch tips a mild salty vegetable, raw or cooked. Conserva tion 2. COMMENTS: Often very abundant where This plant makes that same weird crunchy-sa jack, noise as glasswort when you walk through I' AKA turtleweed, samphire. 03 