NEEDLE-LEAVED TREES AND SHRUBS
4
Eastern hemlock
Tsuga canadensis Pinaceae (Pine family)
QUICK CHECK: Conifer lacking regular branch whorls, with limp tops, tiny needles,
and reproducing only by seed. Crown moderately wide, ragged-looking, and more
tiny cones ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Trunk Tree single, not as straight as those of pines, firs, and spruces, by fissures into
broadly tapered 50-120 (15-37 m) tall. Bark dark red-brown to gray, divided not produced in
rapidly tapered, plates; purplish-red inner layers are visible when cut. Branches extremely thin.
distinct flat-topped annual whorls. The depressed apical shoot midvein, leans or round-tipped, droops, and the thin, twigs 0.3-0.5" are (8-13 mm) long, the with twig tiny (almost short
Needles flat with in the a slightly distal half and a whitish gray line underneath. They are attached the all around Cones tiny, 0.5-0.8" on
invisible) but teeth these twist so that the needles lie in flat sprays on opposite sides of rounded. twig.
petioles, (13-20 mm) long, hanging individually, maturing in one year, the scales thin and
RELATED EDIBLE: Carolina hemlock, of limited distribution in the southern Appalachians, is very similar
but smaller.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Yew needles lack stripes and have a bristle tip. This tree is unrelated to the herbs
called hemlock.
HABITAT: Mature forests with moist to medium soil; associated with beech. yellow birch, sugar and red
maple, white pine. and northern red oak. Prefers ravines, north slopes, and the margins of swamp forests.
FOOD USE: Needles can be boiled or steeped for a weakly flavored tea at any time-not great, but when
backcountry camping, it's better than plain melted snow or boiled lake water. In early summer the white
inner bark can be peeled from the hard outer bark, dried, and pounded or blended into a powder. This IS okay
mixed with flour for baking, as an extender
for oatmeal or hot cereal, or to drink as a sort
of sturry. Conservation 3/1.
COMMENTS: Hemlock's inner bark was
widely used for food by native peoples of
the Pacific Northwest and the Northeast.
The tree was formerly decimated in certain
regions by the leather tanning industry. Hem-
lock is slow-growing and in some areas is in
danger of extermination from deer browsing
and an introduced insect, the hemlock woolly
adelgid. You can see vast stands killed by
the adelgid in the southern Appalachians.
Despite all this, in certain regions it remains
among the most prevalent trees.
62
NEEDLE-LEAVED TREES AND SHRUBS 4 Eastern hemlock Tsuga canadensis Pinaceae (Pine family) QUICK CHECK: Conifer lacking regular branch whorls, with limp tops, tiny needles, and reproducing only by seed. Crown moderately wide, ragged-looking, and more tiny cones ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Trunk Tree single, not as straight as those of pines, firs, and spruces, by fissures into broadly tapered 50-120 (15-37 m) tall. Bark dark red-brown to gray, divided not produced in rapidly tapered, plates; purplish-red inner layers are visible when cut. Branches extremely thin. distinct flat-topped annual whorls. The depressed apical shoot midvein, leans or round-tipped, droops, and the thin, twigs 0.3-0.5" are (8-13 mm) long, the with twig tiny (almost short Needles flat with in the a slightly distal half and a whitish gray line underneath. They are attached the all around Cones tiny, 0.5-0.8" on invisible) but teeth these twist so that the needles lie in flat sprays on opposite sides of rounded. twig. petioles, (13-20 mm) long, hanging individually, maturing in one year, the scales thin and RELATED EDIBLE: Carolina hemlock, of limited distribution in the southern Appalachians, is very similar but smaller. CONFUSING PLANTS: Yew needles lack stripes and have a bristle tip. This tree is unrelated to the herbs called hemlock. HABITAT: Mature forests with moist to medium soil; associated with beech. yellow birch, sugar and red maple, white pine. and northern red oak. Prefers ravines, north slopes, and the margins of swamp forests. FOOD USE: Needles can be boiled or steeped for a weakly flavored tea at any time-not great, but when backcountry camping, it's better than plain melted snow or boiled lake water. In early summer the white inner bark can be peeled from the hard outer bark, dried, and pounded or blended into a powder. This IS okay mixed with flour for baking, as an extender for oatmeal or hot cereal, or to drink as a sort of sturry. Conservation 3/1. COMMENTS: Hemlock's inner bark was widely used for food by native peoples of the Pacific Northwest and the Northeast. The tree was formerly decimated in certain regions by the leather tanning industry. Hem- lock is slow-growing and in some areas is in danger of extermination from deer browsing and an introduced insect, the hemlock woolly adelgid. You can see vast stands killed by the adelgid in the southern Appalachians. Despite all this, in certain regions it remains among the most prevalent trees. 62 