NEEDLE-LEAVED TREES AND SHRUBS
7 Common juniper
Juniperus communis Cupressaceae (Cypress family)
QUICK upward, CHECK: Waist-high, clump-forming bush with wide spreading
ing sharp-tipped needles in whorls of 3, and small blue herries ID difficulty image 1
DESCRIPTION: the Shrub forming clumps up to 20' (6 m) wide, usually circular,
areas, numerous stems growing outward and gently upward, 2-5 (60-150 in open
rarely more than 2" (5 cm) thick. Bark thin, brown, flaky. Twigs hairless, yellowish-green high and
becoming light brown, grooved lengthwise when young. Needles 0.3-0.7" (8-18 mm) long
and 1-2 mm wide, in whorls of 3, narrowed at the base, flattened, depressed in the middle,
the upper side (toward the branch tips) with a broad gray stripe. Inflorescence in the needle very axils snarp-tipped, in late
bushes either male or female, not showy; the male cone-like, the female much smaller and green. Fruit spr is ng. A
"cone" modified into a berry that takes 2-3 years to ripen, green at first but ripening to blue-black and soft if
late summer, the berries sessile, single but crowded, usually containing 3 seeds.
HABITAT: Dry, open sites, usually with poor soil: cliffs, beaches, sandy prairies, rocky outcroppings. old
gravel pits, abandoned farmland, roadsides. Native.
FOOD USE: The berries are used as a seasoning in soups, sauerkraut, alcoholic beverages (gin), and many
other applications. Tender spring branch tips can be used sparingly as a seasoning herb. Needles can also
be steeped for tea. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This may be the most widespread woody species in the world, native to North America and
Eurasia. Although the plant is easily killed by fire, it thrives mostly in fire-maintained habitats.
Related edible:
Juniperus virginiana
TID
8 Eastern redcedar
This is tree-sized juniper that is common and widespread in our region, with trunks growth that
a furrowed and thin bark that shreds in fibrous, red-brown strips. The young lay-
are has often spreading needles similar to those of common juniper, but older branches against have the
ered, scale-like needles pressed
twigs. The berries of redcedar can be used as a
seasoning similar to common juniper. Because
are some known species of juniper with mildly toxic needles, needles
there and I am not aware of any food tradition using rede N edar
I advise against using them for tea or seasoning
NEEDLE-LEAVED TREES AND SHRUBS 7 Common juniper Juniperus communis Cupressaceae (Cypress family) QUICK upward, CHECK: Waist-high, clump-forming bush with wide spreading ing sharp-tipped needles in whorls of 3, and small blue herries ID difficulty image 1 DESCRIPTION: the Shrub forming clumps up to 20' (6 m) wide, usually circular, areas, numerous stems growing outward and gently upward, 2-5 (60-150 in open rarely more than 2" (5 cm) thick. Bark thin, brown, flaky. Twigs hairless, yellowish-green high and becoming light brown, grooved lengthwise when young. Needles 0.3-0.7" (8-18 mm) long and 1-2 mm wide, in whorls of 3, narrowed at the base, flattened, depressed in the middle, the upper side (toward the branch tips) with a broad gray stripe. Inflorescence in the needle very axils snarp-tipped, in late bushes either male or female, not showy; the male cone-like, the female much smaller and green. Fruit spr is ng. A "cone" modified into a berry that takes 2-3 years to ripen, green at first but ripening to blue-black and soft if late summer, the berries sessile, single but crowded, usually containing 3 seeds. HABITAT: Dry, open sites, usually with poor soil: cliffs, beaches, sandy prairies, rocky outcroppings. old gravel pits, abandoned farmland, roadsides. Native. FOOD USE: The berries are used as a seasoning in soups, sauerkraut, alcoholic beverages (gin), and many other applications. Tender spring branch tips can be used sparingly as a seasoning herb. Needles can also be steeped for tea. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This may be the most widespread woody species in the world, native to North America and Eurasia. Although the plant is easily killed by fire, it thrives mostly in fire-maintained habitats. Related edible: Juniperus virginiana TID 8 Eastern redcedar This is tree-sized juniper that is common and widespread in our region, with trunks growth that a furrowed and thin bark that shreds in fibrous, red-brown strips. The young lay- are has often spreading needles similar to those of common juniper, but older branches against have the ered, scale-like needles pressed twigs. The berries of redcedar can be used as a seasoning similar to common juniper. Because are some known species of juniper with mildly toxic needles, needles there and I am not aware of any food tradition using rede N edar I advise against using them for tea or seasoning 