6 Black crowberry
2
Empetrum nigrum family Empetraceae
QUICK ID: Tiny needle-like leaves; nearly sessile black berries depressed on both
ends. ID difficulty 1. prostrate shrub. Stems creeping, 1-3 mm crowded, thick, sparsely to 8"
DESCRIPTION: Mat-forming, sweeping upward, sometimes erect where and peels.
branched, the Bark branch of tips growth is pubescent; later it becomes reddish brown evergreen,
Leaves 3-7 mm long, tips). Margins curled so far downward that
(20 cm) high. new borne mostly in whorls of 4, needle-like, blunt-tipped, they join to form
Composite range.
crowded (especially line near underneath branch where the margins meet. Petioles wide and very in short, leaf axils arising in midsummer. from a peg-
like pedestal. Flowers borne nearly singly but often close together, broader than long, 4-6 mm across, to black in late
a tube with a white stemless, tiny and inconspicuous, pink to purplish, dimpled at the end
with Berry a roundish, little speck of flower remnants, juicy inside with 6-9 hard seeds and no pulp, ripening
summer. Beneath the fruit is a 6-part calyx.
HABITAT: Rocky or gravelly places in full sunlight; open tundra, outcrops, shores, alpine meadows. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather the berries by hand or rake in late summer and fall. Eat fresh, use in hot cereal, or make
juice. Flavor is mild but pleasant. Sometimes they remain available into winter and the following spring.
Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is an important wild fruit of the arctic, where it is often found in great abundance.
RELATED EDIBLES: Purple crowberry E. atropurpured is very similar but the branch tips rarely stand erect.
The fruit is purple and somewhat smaller. It likes drier sites than black crowberry and is often found in rocky
or sandy areas along coasts. Pink crowberry E. eamesii
has translucent pink berries depressed in the cen-
ter; it inhabits dry, rocky or sandy outcroppings and
hilltops. The leaves are shorter than those of black
crowberry, and clumped at the ends of the numerous
short branches. The stems of pink crowberry hug the
surface of rocks or sand, the tips scarcely if at all raised
above the ground.
Black crowberry.
64
Pink crowberry
Purple crowberry.
6 Black crowberry 2 Empetrum nigrum family Empetraceae QUICK ID: Tiny needle-like leaves; nearly sessile black berries depressed on both ends. ID difficulty 1. prostrate shrub. Stems creeping, 1-3 mm crowded, thick, sparsely to 8" DESCRIPTION: Mat-forming, sweeping upward, sometimes erect where and peels. branched, the Bark branch of tips growth is pubescent; later it becomes reddish brown evergreen, Leaves 3-7 mm long, tips). Margins curled so far downward that (20 cm) high. new borne mostly in whorls of 4, needle-like, blunt-tipped, they join to form Composite range. crowded (especially line near underneath branch where the margins meet. Petioles wide and very in short, leaf axils arising in midsummer. from a peg- like pedestal. Flowers borne nearly singly but often close together, broader than long, 4-6 mm across, to black in late a tube with a white stemless, tiny and inconspicuous, pink to purplish, dimpled at the end with Berry a roundish, little speck of flower remnants, juicy inside with 6-9 hard seeds and no pulp, ripening summer. Beneath the fruit is a 6-part calyx. HABITAT: Rocky or gravelly places in full sunlight; open tundra, outcrops, shores, alpine meadows. Native. FOOD USE: Gather the berries by hand or rake in late summer and fall. Eat fresh, use in hot cereal, or make juice. Flavor is mild but pleasant. Sometimes they remain available into winter and the following spring. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is an important wild fruit of the arctic, where it is often found in great abundance. RELATED EDIBLES: Purple crowberry E. atropurpured is very similar but the branch tips rarely stand erect. The fruit is purple and somewhat smaller. It likes drier sites than black crowberry and is often found in rocky or sandy areas along coasts. Pink crowberry E. eamesii has translucent pink berries depressed in the cen- ter; it inhabits dry, rocky or sandy outcroppings and hilltops. The leaves are shorter than those of black crowberry, and clumped at the ends of the numerous short branches. The stems of pink crowberry hug the surface of rocks or sand, the tips scarcely if at all raised above the ground. Black crowberry. 64 Pink crowberry Purple crowberry. 