9
Canada yew
2
Taxus canadensis family Taxaceae
QUICK CHECK: Shrub with thick, flat needles in flat rows; fleshy red fruit.
ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Shrub often growing in thick colonies, spreading by tip-rooting of branches.
Stems 2-8' (60 240 cm) tall. typically leaning or decumbent, up to 3" (8 cm) thick. Bark light
brown with thin, scaly flakes. Twigs uniformly light green on new growth with a raised
linear ridge just below each needle; on older branches these ridges remain light green but
develop brown bark between them. Needles arranged in rows on each side of the twig,
reaching 0.8" (? cm) long: they are thick, soft, flattened, wider than those of other flat-needled conifers ir
our area. not striped with light gray underneath, with a midvein that protrudes above and below. The tip is sharp
and bristle-like. Berry (an aril) consists of a large elliptic seed surrounded
by a soft, red, delicate-skinned flesh that is deeply and neatly indented al
both ends, ripening in late summer.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Both hemlock and balsam fir seedlings have blunt-
tipped needles with gray-white lines on the underside. There is no confusing
fruit in our region.
HABITAT: Mature deciduous and mixed forests; often confined to rugged
slopes and islands, persisting elsewhere only where deer numbers are low.
Native.
FOOD USE: Gather soft red berries and suck the pulp as a snack. WARNING:
Spit out the seeds; they are toxic, as are the needles and bark. Conservation 1.
Comments: The fruits are slimy and very sweet. I have eaten them hundreds
of times but have never cooked or stored them. This shrub was formerly
extremely abundant in much of the northern US, but since it is preferred
above virtually all else as winter browse by white-tailed deer, it has been
exterminated from most of its former range.
9 Canada yew 2 Taxus canadensis family Taxaceae QUICK CHECK: Shrub with thick, flat needles in flat rows; fleshy red fruit. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Shrub often growing in thick colonies, spreading by tip-rooting of branches. Stems 2-8' (60 240 cm) tall. typically leaning or decumbent, up to 3" (8 cm) thick. Bark light brown with thin, scaly flakes. Twigs uniformly light green on new growth with a raised linear ridge just below each needle; on older branches these ridges remain light green but develop brown bark between them. Needles arranged in rows on each side of the twig, reaching 0.8" (? cm) long: they are thick, soft, flattened, wider than those of other flat-needled conifers ir our area. not striped with light gray underneath, with a midvein that protrudes above and below. The tip is sharp and bristle-like. Berry (an aril) consists of a large elliptic seed surrounded by a soft, red, delicate-skinned flesh that is deeply and neatly indented al both ends, ripening in late summer. CONFUSING PLANTS: Both hemlock and balsam fir seedlings have blunt- tipped needles with gray-white lines on the underside. There is no confusing fruit in our region. HABITAT: Mature deciduous and mixed forests; often confined to rugged slopes and islands, persisting elsewhere only where deer numbers are low. Native. FOOD USE: Gather soft red berries and suck the pulp as a snack. WARNING: Spit out the seeds; they are toxic, as are the needles and bark. Conservation 1. Comments: The fruits are slimy and very sweet. I have eaten them hundreds of times but have never cooked or stored them. This shrub was formerly extremely abundant in much of the northern US, but since it is preferred above virtually all else as winter browse by white-tailed deer, it has been exterminated from most of its former range. 