1
1
Juglans Black walnut nigra + Juglandaceae 2 (Walnut family)
pinnately compound leaves and spherical difficulty green 1. fruits with
QUICK CHECK: Tree in sections, with surrounding a rough-shelled nut. ID
flesh not peeling trunk single, prominent. generally straight, fissures reaching between 100
DESCRIPTION: the crown Large taller tree. than the wide. Bark dark gray, thick, with deep with naked buds. Pith
blocky (30 m) ridges. tall, Twigs stout, greenish-brown Leaf are and heart-shaped, smooth, finely notched hairy, at the compound top, with 3 with darkened 13-21 bundle leaflets, scars the
finely 60-70°, Leaflets end forming is wide, leaflet serrated, a not tan, sessile, "monkey reduced forking and minutely 2-6" chambered. face." or or absent. (5-15 curving Leaves hairy cm) Petiole/rachis toward along long, up scars to lanceolate the 2' tip, (60 midvein flat. finely cm) and Flowers to long, above hairy, tiny, ovate, alternate, in wind-pollinated the and rounded drooping top major a pinnately narrow at catkins; veins the base, in ridge, below. spring, female the naked Secondary tips male flowers in acuminate, the and are proximal veins female tiny the numerous, and separate margins quarter. few in
on the same tree. each Male with flowers a naked are ovary numerous and two pinkish wing-like projections. Fruits nearly spherical, in sections; 1.5-3"
small (3.8-8 clusters, in diameter, borne singly or in clusters of 2-3. ripening to green, the flesh not peeling
the aromatic surface is bumpy but not hairy or sticky. Nut shell is
very thick, and its surface has a corrugated, brain-like texture; the
kernel is convoluted.
HABITAT: Wooded slopes and valleys with very rich soil; also colonizes
old fields and forest edges. Often planted outside of its natural range
and escapes to fencerows. Native.
FOOD USE: Pick nuts off the ground in autumn. Soft hulls can be
removed by stomping or smashing. (Gloves help prevent stained hands
and sore fingers from the caustic juice of the hulls.) Dry the nuts for a
few weeks before cracking. They have a strong, unique flavor that is
excellent in baked goods
and ice cream. Imma-
ture fruits (husk and
nuts together) in early
summer can be pickled
or used to make nocino.
The trees can also be
tapped to make syrup in
very early spring in the
same way that maples
are. Conservation 1.
WARNING: Wear
groves and eye protec-
tion while cracking!
COMMENTS: This
abundant tree produces
one of our most practi-
cal wild nuts for home
use. Wild black walnuts
are commercially har-
vested and processed
and can be purchased
in most large grocery
stores. The wood is the
most valuable in North
America
68
1 1 Juglans Black walnut nigra + Juglandaceae 2 (Walnut family) pinnately compound leaves and spherical difficulty green 1. fruits with QUICK CHECK: Tree in sections, with surrounding a rough-shelled nut. ID flesh not peeling trunk single, prominent. generally straight, fissures reaching between 100 DESCRIPTION: the crown Large taller tree. than the wide. Bark dark gray, thick, with deep with naked buds. Pith blocky (30 m) ridges. tall, Twigs stout, greenish-brown Leaf are and heart-shaped, smooth, finely notched hairy, at the compound top, with 3 with darkened 13-21 bundle leaflets, scars the finely 60-70°, Leaflets end forming is wide, leaflet serrated, a not tan, sessile, "monkey reduced forking and minutely 2-6" chambered. face." or or absent. (5-15 curving Leaves hairy cm) Petiole/rachis toward along long, up scars to lanceolate the 2' tip, (60 midvein flat. finely cm) and Flowers to long, above hairy, tiny, ovate, alternate, in wind-pollinated the and rounded drooping top major a pinnately narrow at catkins; veins the base, in ridge, below. spring, female the naked Secondary tips male flowers in acuminate, the and are proximal veins female tiny the numerous, and separate margins quarter. few in on the same tree. each Male with flowers a naked are ovary numerous and two pinkish wing-like projections. Fruits nearly spherical, in sections; 1.5-3" small (3.8-8 clusters, in diameter, borne singly or in clusters of 2-3. ripening to green, the flesh not peeling the aromatic surface is bumpy but not hairy or sticky. Nut shell is very thick, and its surface has a corrugated, brain-like texture; the kernel is convoluted. HABITAT: Wooded slopes and valleys with very rich soil; also colonizes old fields and forest edges. Often planted outside of its natural range and escapes to fencerows. Native. FOOD USE: Pick nuts off the ground in autumn. Soft hulls can be removed by stomping or smashing. (Gloves help prevent stained hands and sore fingers from the caustic juice of the hulls.) Dry the nuts for a few weeks before cracking. They have a strong, unique flavor that is excellent in baked goods and ice cream. Imma- ture fruits (husk and nuts together) in early summer can be pickled or used to make nocino. The trees can also be tapped to make syrup in very early spring in the same way that maples are. Conservation 1. WARNING: Wear groves and eye protec- tion while cracking! COMMENTS: This abundant tree produces one of our most practi- cal wild nuts for home use. Wild black walnuts are commercially har- vested and processed and can be purchased in most large grocery stores. The wood is the most valuable in North America 68 