AND
SHRUBS
WITH
NUTS
2 Butternut
Son
3
1
LLI FH-157
Juglans cinerea
Juglandaceae (Walnut family)
QUICK CHECK: Tree with pinnately compound leaves and football shaped
fruits, husks not peeling in sections. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Medium to large tree, the trunks single or clumped, tall in competition but
the crowns of open-grown trees spread wider than tall. Bark silver-gray, smooth on
trees, broken by shallow fissures into smooth-topped, almost glossy, interlacing ridges young on
older trunks. Twigs stout, smooth, finely hairy, green at first, turning brown, with wide, dark brown chambered
pith, naked buds, and leaf scars with a "monkey face" that is not notched at the top. Leaves alternate, pinnately
compound, up to 2' (60 cm) long, with 11-17 leaflets, the end leaflet similar in size to the side leaflets. Rachis/
petiole not channeled, ridged on top, hairy, with some of the hairs topped by sticky glands. Leaflets sessile
or nearly so, ovate to oblong, 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, rounded at the base, with acuminate tips, hairy on both
surfaces but more so below. Midvein raised; secondary veins broadly angled, numerous, faintly depressed
above. Margins finely serrated with wavy, shallow, nipple-tipped teeth. Flowers wind-pollinated in spring. male
and female separate on the same tree, both tiny. Male flowers hang in catkins; female flowers short-stalked.
in clusters, with two curling purplish appendages extending from the ovary. Fruit football-shaped, green with
a sticky, hairy, aromatic surface, 2-3.5" (5-9 cm) long; this flesh turns brown then black after falling but does
not peel in sections. Nut has a very thick shell with a knife-like tip and a corrugated surface with thin ridges.
Kernel comes in two paddle-shaped pieces.
HABITAT: Rich, well-drained soil, especially sandy loam; with elm, hickory, white ash, sugar maple, and
hackberry. Very successful at invading fencerows and abandoned fields. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather the nuts as they fall in autumn, or shake them down
when ripe. Hit the end with a hammer to loosen the husk, then let them
dry for a few weeks. Crack with a hammer by striking either end, not the
side. Immature nuts can be pickled in their husks. Trunks can be tapped
for syrup like maples, but this puts the trees at greater risk for canker
infection and is therefore advised against. Conservation 1.
WARNING: Wear gloves and eye protection while cracking!
COMMENTS: This nut has very soft and delicious meat. However, it is
mostly shell, and it takes a pile to get a cupful of nutmeat. Unfortunately,
this tree has been decimated by an introduced disease, butternut canker.
It survives mainly on forest edges or open areas and has mostly died
off in deep woods; introgression with Japanese walnut has imparted
disease resistance to some individuals.
69
AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS 2 Butternut Son 3 1 LLI FH-157 Juglans cinerea Juglandaceae (Walnut family) QUICK CHECK: Tree with pinnately compound leaves and football shaped fruits, husks not peeling in sections. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Medium to large tree, the trunks single or clumped, tall in competition but the crowns of open-grown trees spread wider than tall. Bark silver-gray, smooth on trees, broken by shallow fissures into smooth-topped, almost glossy, interlacing ridges young on older trunks. Twigs stout, smooth, finely hairy, green at first, turning brown, with wide, dark brown chambered pith, naked buds, and leaf scars with a "monkey face" that is not notched at the top. Leaves alternate, pinnately compound, up to 2' (60 cm) long, with 11-17 leaflets, the end leaflet similar in size to the side leaflets. Rachis/ petiole not channeled, ridged on top, hairy, with some of the hairs topped by sticky glands. Leaflets sessile or nearly so, ovate to oblong, 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, rounded at the base, with acuminate tips, hairy on both surfaces but more so below. Midvein raised; secondary veins broadly angled, numerous, faintly depressed above. Margins finely serrated with wavy, shallow, nipple-tipped teeth. Flowers wind-pollinated in spring. male and female separate on the same tree, both tiny. Male flowers hang in catkins; female flowers short-stalked. in clusters, with two curling purplish appendages extending from the ovary. Fruit football-shaped, green with a sticky, hairy, aromatic surface, 2-3.5" (5-9 cm) long; this flesh turns brown then black after falling but does not peel in sections. Nut has a very thick shell with a knife-like tip and a corrugated surface with thin ridges. Kernel comes in two paddle-shaped pieces. HABITAT: Rich, well-drained soil, especially sandy loam; with elm, hickory, white ash, sugar maple, and hackberry. Very successful at invading fencerows and abandoned fields. Native. FOOD USE: Gather the nuts as they fall in autumn, or shake them down when ripe. Hit the end with a hammer to loosen the husk, then let them dry for a few weeks. Crack with a hammer by striking either end, not the side. Immature nuts can be pickled in their husks. Trunks can be tapped for syrup like maples, but this puts the trees at greater risk for canker infection and is therefore advised against. Conservation 1. WARNING: Wear gloves and eye protection while cracking! COMMENTS: This nut has very soft and delicious meat. However, it is mostly shell, and it takes a pile to get a cupful of nutmeat. Unfortunately, this tree has been decimated by an introduced disease, butternut canker. It survives mainly on forest edges or open areas and has mostly died off in deep woods; introgression with Japanese walnut has imparted disease resistance to some individuals. 69 