TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS
HICKORY Carya Juglandaceae IWE-134 (Walnut family)
genus CHECK: Pinnately compound leaves; fruits with multiple-part 1. peeling husk containing a single nut
with a divided DESCRIPTION: interior Large trees, the trunks single and erect, dominant, dividing usually into longitudinal straight and ridges taller
QUICK and convoluted kernel. ID difficulty
COLLECTIVE and dark gray on saplings, and pinnately
than wide. Bark hard or and compact, as they age. smooth Twigs thick very with large terminal buds. are important Leaves alternate in species identifica-
or peeling strips plates end of the leaf. Leaflet counts shade than in full
tion, but any sessile, and ovate or obovate to lance-elliptic, the tips pointed. teeth. Midvein flat to faintly
compound, in the one leaflets species larger it is toward common the for the leaves to have one more set of leaflets Blades in are dark green,
sun. Leaflets paired, surfaces, the margins serrated with shallow depressed above. Flow-
depressed tough, and above. thick with Secondary glossy upper veins numerous, broadly angled, straight, flat to faintly in late spring or early
ers tiny, wind-pollinated
summer, male and female borne separately
on the same tree. The male are in catkins, the
female single or in small clusters. The fruits (nut
and husk together) are 0.7-3" (1.8-8 cm) long,
green and smooth on the outside, darkening
after falling, dividing neatly into 2-5 parts and
containing a single nut. Nuts have hard, light-
colored, smooth or ridged shells. Kernel soft,
divided, and convoluted.
FOOD USE: Nuts can be gathered from the
ground after they have fallen in autumn or early
winter, or you can shake them down. Dry to
facilitate cracking and shelling. Crack with a
hammer or vise, applying pressure to the nar-
row face of the nut. Remove nutmeats with a
nutpick and small wire cutters. Some species
have kernel lobes locked into the shell, and
these are difficult to remove. Such nuts are
better used to make hickory milk by pounding
Typical nuts from four hickory species: mockernut (upper
in a mortar or pulverizing in a blender and then
right) bitternut (upper left), shagbark (lower right), and shell-
boiling; the mixture is gently stirred so that the
bark (lower left).
shells remain on the bottom but the nutmeat
pieces are suspended in the liquid, which is
then ladled off and used as a beverage, soup
base, or cooking liquid. Some hickories yield
very small amounts of sugary sap when tapped.
Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Hickories are widespread in east-
ern North America and produce edible nuts
that are very popular among wild harvesters.
For thousands of years these oil-rich nuts were
probably the single most important food in our
region. The nuts are frequently infested with
weevil larvae (but some regions and species are
mostly weevil-free). All are native. As a group
the hickories are easy to recognize, but indi-
vidual species can be tricky and some common
names have been systematically misused. Add-
Cross section of black lickury nut, showing locked lobes that
ing to this, hybridization is common between
make sheling difficult
some members. The pecan is our most familiar
species of hickory.
70
TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS HICKORY Carya Juglandaceae IWE-134 (Walnut family) genus CHECK: Pinnately compound leaves; fruits with multiple-part 1. peeling husk containing a single nut with a divided DESCRIPTION: interior Large trees, the trunks single and erect, dominant, dividing usually into longitudinal straight and ridges taller QUICK and convoluted kernel. ID difficulty COLLECTIVE and dark gray on saplings, and pinnately than wide. Bark hard or and compact, as they age. smooth Twigs thick very with large terminal buds. are important Leaves alternate in species identifica- or peeling strips plates end of the leaf. Leaflet counts shade than in full tion, but any sessile, and ovate or obovate to lance-elliptic, the tips pointed. teeth. Midvein flat to faintly compound, in the one leaflets species larger it is toward common the for the leaves to have one more set of leaflets Blades in are dark green, sun. Leaflets paired, surfaces, the margins serrated with shallow depressed above. Flow- depressed tough, and above. thick with Secondary glossy upper veins numerous, broadly angled, straight, flat to faintly in late spring or early ers tiny, wind-pollinated summer, male and female borne separately on the same tree. The male are in catkins, the female single or in small clusters. The fruits (nut and husk together) are 0.7-3" (1.8-8 cm) long, green and smooth on the outside, darkening after falling, dividing neatly into 2-5 parts and containing a single nut. Nuts have hard, light- colored, smooth or ridged shells. Kernel soft, divided, and convoluted. FOOD USE: Nuts can be gathered from the ground after they have fallen in autumn or early winter, or you can shake them down. Dry to facilitate cracking and shelling. Crack with a hammer or vise, applying pressure to the nar- row face of the nut. Remove nutmeats with a nutpick and small wire cutters. Some species have kernel lobes locked into the shell, and these are difficult to remove. Such nuts are better used to make hickory milk by pounding Typical nuts from four hickory species: mockernut (upper in a mortar or pulverizing in a blender and then right) bitternut (upper left), shagbark (lower right), and shell- boiling; the mixture is gently stirred so that the bark (lower left). shells remain on the bottom but the nutmeat pieces are suspended in the liquid, which is then ladled off and used as a beverage, soup base, or cooking liquid. Some hickories yield very small amounts of sugary sap when tapped. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Hickories are widespread in east- ern North America and produce edible nuts that are very popular among wild harvesters. For thousands of years these oil-rich nuts were probably the single most important food in our region. The nuts are frequently infested with weevil larvae (but some regions and species are mostly weevil-free). All are native. As a group the hickories are easy to recognize, but indi- vidual species can be tricky and some common names have been systematically misused. Add- Cross section of black lickury nut, showing locked lobes that ing to this, hybridization is common between make sheling difficult some members. The pecan is our most familiar species of hickory. 70 