TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS
3
Pecan
Carya illinoinensis
3
IWE 134
DESCRIPTION: deep furrows and Our largest hickory, the crown spreading widely, the bark
leaf. Fruit elongated, blocky ridges (reminiscent of black walnut) Leaflets dark gray Nim
twice as in clusters of up to 10, husk thin and ridged along sutures narrow. 11 at 15 least Der
long as wide, not flattened, the shell smooth. brown, thin, without ridges. Nut
HABITAT: associated Native to the higher parts of river floodplains and rich valleys;
with black walnut, honey locust, red mulberry, sycamore, shellbark commonly hickory,
Often stanted
and swamp chestnut oak
suts
Native.
range
COMMENTS: The nuts drop in late fall and
can be picked from the ground. They store Neil
and can be easily cracked with a hand-asld
nutcracker. Pecans yield in great abundance.
and a single tree may produce hundred: of
pounds. The nuts are also easier to crack and
have a much higher kernel proportion than
most other species. Pecans are often planted
as ornamental or yard trees, expanding COL-
lecting opportunities.
4
Water hickory
Carya aquatica
DESCRIPTION: Large
tree with shaggy bark.
Leaves have 9-13 leaflets,
similar to those of pecan,
the
with which it readily
hybridizes. Nuts in clus-
ters up to several, flattened. in thin husks with
raised ridges. Shells dark and rough. The kernels
are bitter but can be used to nake a superb
edible oil. AKA bitter pecan
HABITAT: Flat poorly drained areas espe
cially with clay soil and river floodplains but
not the wettest parts.
COMMENTS: The Kernels are bitte out they
make an excellent oil The she'l propor tion is
higher than with bitternut
71
TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS 3 Pecan Carya illinoinensis 3 IWE 134 DESCRIPTION: deep furrows and Our largest hickory, the crown spreading widely, the bark leaf. Fruit elongated, blocky ridges (reminiscent of black walnut) Leaflets dark gray Nim twice as in clusters of up to 10, husk thin and ridged along sutures narrow. 11 at 15 least Der long as wide, not flattened, the shell smooth. brown, thin, without ridges. Nut HABITAT: associated Native to the higher parts of river floodplains and rich valleys; with black walnut, honey locust, red mulberry, sycamore, shellbark commonly hickory, Often stanted and swamp chestnut oak suts Native. range COMMENTS: The nuts drop in late fall and can be picked from the ground. They store Neil and can be easily cracked with a hand-asld nutcracker. Pecans yield in great abundance. and a single tree may produce hundred: of pounds. The nuts are also easier to crack and have a much higher kernel proportion than most other species. Pecans are often planted as ornamental or yard trees, expanding COL- lecting opportunities. 4 Water hickory Carya aquatica DESCRIPTION: Large tree with shaggy bark. Leaves have 9-13 leaflets, similar to those of pecan, the with which it readily hybridizes. Nuts in clus- ters up to several, flattened. in thin husks with raised ridges. Shells dark and rough. The kernels are bitter but can be used to nake a superb edible oil. AKA bitter pecan HABITAT: Flat poorly drained areas espe cially with clay soil and river floodplains but not the wettest parts. COMMENTS: The Kernels are bitte out they make an excellent oil The she'l propor tion is higher than with bitternut 71 