TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS
Shagbark flowers.
The bark is not always this shaggy
7 Shellbark
+
Carya laciniosa
3
IWE-151
DESCRIPTION: Large tree with shaggy bark (lower trunks of very old trees lose their
shagginess). Twigs and buds are very large. Leaves to 2' (60 cm) long, usually with 7 (sun)
or 9 (shade) leaflets. Fruits to 3" (8 cm) long, occasionally more, with extremely thick
husks. Nuts large, flattened, ridged, with very
thick shells.
HABITAT: Rich bottomlands and valleys, high river floodplains.
Associated with pecan, swamp chestnut oak, swamp white oak, bur
oak, red mulberry, pawpaw, honeylocust, hackberry, black walnut.
COMMENTS: The lobes of the kernels are often slightly locked
into the shells, but because of their size they are still one of the
easiest to separate- if you can crack them. The flavor is excellent.
Not very susceptible to weevils. This uncommon species produces
the largest hickory nuts. Unfortunately, because this species has
prefers extremely fertile soils in flat land, most of its habitat
been destroyed by agriculture. AKA kingnut.
Shellbark nuts compared to a black walnut.
TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS Shagbark flowers. The bark is not always this shaggy 7 Shellbark + Carya laciniosa 3 IWE-151 DESCRIPTION: Large tree with shaggy bark (lower trunks of very old trees lose their shagginess). Twigs and buds are very large. Leaves to 2' (60 cm) long, usually with 7 (sun) or 9 (shade) leaflets. Fruits to 3" (8 cm) long, occasionally more, with extremely thick husks. Nuts large, flattened, ridged, with very thick shells. HABITAT: Rich bottomlands and valleys, high river floodplains. Associated with pecan, swamp chestnut oak, swamp white oak, bur oak, red mulberry, pawpaw, honeylocust, hackberry, black walnut. COMMENTS: The lobes of the kernels are often slightly locked into the shells, but because of their size they are still one of the easiest to separate- if you can crack them. The flavor is excellent. Not very susceptible to weevils. This uncommon species produces the largest hickory nuts. Unfortunately, because this species has prefers extremely fertile soils in flat land, most of its habitat been destroyed by agriculture. AKA kingnut. Shellbark nuts compared to a black walnut. 