TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS
Bitternut Carya cordiformis
5 Bark is smoother than the other species. the buds developing naked and tight sulphur-yellow. crisscross to the
DESCRIPTION: Leaves strips with have age. 7-11 Twigs ovate thinner to lanceolate than Nuts other leaflets. smooth hickories, with Husk round very thin bases, and elongated flexible, adhering needle-like tips,
HABITAT: and nut, very with thin ridges Hardwood shells. along Meats the forests sutures. have with a highly medium convoluted maple, levels elm, of "brainlike" soil white moisture, ash, surface. basswood, especially northern higher parts red of oak, river black floodplains walnut,
Associated
with
sugar
tile
slopes
COMMENTS: buckeye. and fer beech. Husks must be removed, as they do not fall off. adequate Nuts can press, be mashed the delicious and boiled oil can for a be long America pressed time,
and
.
out after It which contains oil can none be of decanted the most kernel's important from bitterness. the hickory top. If This you species is have the in best an the source past. It of is vegetable the most with oil abundant native confusion to and North widespread attached
and may have been the Most often called "pignut," a name great AKA yel-
hickory (see common and produces hickory). the Commonly heaviest crops. hybridizes with shagbark, pecan, and possibly other species.
lowbud hickory, oilnut.
The namesake yellow bud.
6 Shagbark Carya ovata
3
3
IWE-150
DESCRIPTION: Dark gray bark hangs off in long, thin, shaggy strips. Leaflets 5-7, the
thick, terminal 3 much larger. Terminal buds and twigs are very thick. Husk 0.2-0,7" (5-18 mm)
erately thick, the kernetlobes not locked inside them.
failing off at maturity Nut ridged, usually somewhat flattened laterally, Shell mod-
derived HABITAT: soll Well-drained hardwood forests; most common in hilly areas of limestone-
Associated with oaks, other hickories, and black cherry
lobes COMMENTS: make this This IS my favorite nut in the world. Husks should easily loosen
monly caten wild one hickory of our nut. easier In some species to shell. Susceptible to weevils. After pecan, from good, this is ripe nuts. Free
regions, and in many books before 1960, this tree is called the "shellbark." most com-
74
TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS Bitternut Carya cordiformis 5 Bark is smoother than the other species. the buds developing naked and tight sulphur-yellow. crisscross to the DESCRIPTION: Leaves strips with have age. 7-11 Twigs ovate thinner to lanceolate than Nuts other leaflets. smooth hickories, with Husk round very thin bases, and elongated flexible, adhering needle-like tips, HABITAT: and nut, very with thin ridges Hardwood shells. along Meats the forests sutures. have with a highly medium convoluted maple, levels elm, of "brainlike" soil white moisture, ash, surface. basswood, especially northern higher parts red of oak, river black floodplains walnut, Associated with sugar tile slopes COMMENTS: buckeye. and fer beech. Husks must be removed, as they do not fall off. adequate Nuts can press, be mashed the delicious and boiled oil can for a be long America pressed time, and . out after It which contains oil can none be of decanted the most kernel's important from bitterness. the hickory top. If This you species is have the in best an the source past. It of is vegetable the most with oil abundant native confusion to and North widespread attached and may have been the Most often called "pignut," a name great AKA yel- hickory (see common and produces hickory). the Commonly heaviest crops. hybridizes with shagbark, pecan, and possibly other species. lowbud hickory, oilnut. The namesake yellow bud. 6 Shagbark Carya ovata 3 3 IWE-150 DESCRIPTION: Dark gray bark hangs off in long, thin, shaggy strips. Leaflets 5-7, the thick, terminal 3 much larger. Terminal buds and twigs are very thick. Husk 0.2-0,7" (5-18 mm) erately thick, the kernetlobes not locked inside them. failing off at maturity Nut ridged, usually somewhat flattened laterally, Shell mod- derived HABITAT: soll Well-drained hardwood forests; most common in hilly areas of limestone- Associated with oaks, other hickories, and black cherry lobes COMMENTS: make this This IS my favorite nut in the world. Husks should easily loosen monly caten wild one hickory of our nut. easier In some species to shell. Susceptible to weevils. After pecan, from good, this is ripe nuts. Free regions, and in many books before 1960, this tree is called the "shellbark." most com- 74 