NUTS
10 Common hickory
Carya
glabra
3
DESCRIPTION: Bark extremely variable, ranging from almost shaggy to almost smooth
At one extreme it can look like a shagbark, at the other like a bitternut. Twigs thinner than
shagbark with smaller, more pointed buds. Leaves have 5-7 leaflets Fruit often somewhat
elongated and slightly pear-shaped. Husks stiff, thin to moderately thick, usually remaining
slightly opened but attached to the nut when ripe; there are no ridges along the sutures.
Nuts small and oval with smooth shells, lacking sharp angles but sometimes with smooth,
faint ridges. Shells thick and the kernels locked.
HABITAT: Hardwood forests on well-drained soil, particularly sand.
COMMENTS: Nuts have excellent flavor, but because of their small size, thick shells, and locked lobes they
are laborious to shell. However, the nuts keep better than shagbarks and are the best for making hickory milk
Highly susceptible to weevils. Called "pignut hickory" in printed sources, but that name carries insoluble
confusion. "Pignut" in spoken American English has always referred to Carya cordiformis. Pehr Kalm's writ-
ings confirm this was already the case in 1749, and it remains true today. Yet a botanical error well over 100
years ago attached the name "pignut" to Carya glabra, and the mistake has since become entrenched in the
literature, leading to the erroneous belief that there is a "sweet" and a "bitter" species of pignut Let me
clarify: C. cordiformis, which books call "bitternut" or "yellowbud" hickory, but most laypeople call "pignu","
has a bitter kernel. C. glabra, which most laypeople call "hickory" but books call "pignut," has a sweet kerner
In fact, many people on a taste test will claim it as their favorite hickory nut. Most dendrologists don't eat
hickory nuts, so they don't care about this confusion. But for us foragers, it matters. I'm done with the pignut
nonsense-this tree is common hickory in my book, and it is delicious. To add another layer of confusion,
botanists have long debated whether C. glabra is one highly variable species, or should be split into two This
debate has less relevance to wild nutters; both forms have sweet kernels.
75
NUTS 10 Common hickory Carya glabra 3 DESCRIPTION: Bark extremely variable, ranging from almost shaggy to almost smooth At one extreme it can look like a shagbark, at the other like a bitternut. Twigs thinner than shagbark with smaller, more pointed buds. Leaves have 5-7 leaflets Fruit often somewhat elongated and slightly pear-shaped. Husks stiff, thin to moderately thick, usually remaining slightly opened but attached to the nut when ripe; there are no ridges along the sutures. Nuts small and oval with smooth shells, lacking sharp angles but sometimes with smooth, faint ridges. Shells thick and the kernels locked. HABITAT: Hardwood forests on well-drained soil, particularly sand. COMMENTS: Nuts have excellent flavor, but because of their small size, thick shells, and locked lobes they are laborious to shell. However, the nuts keep better than shagbarks and are the best for making hickory milk Highly susceptible to weevils. Called "pignut hickory" in printed sources, but that name carries insoluble confusion. "Pignut" in spoken American English has always referred to Carya cordiformis. Pehr Kalm's writ- ings confirm this was already the case in 1749, and it remains true today. Yet a botanical error well over 100 years ago attached the name "pignut" to Carya glabra, and the mistake has since become entrenched in the literature, leading to the erroneous belief that there is a "sweet" and a "bitter" species of pignut Let me clarify: C. cordiformis, which books call "bitternut" or "yellowbud" hickory, but most laypeople call "pignu"," has a bitter kernel. C. glabra, which most laypeople call "hickory" but books call "pignut," has a sweet kerner In fact, many people on a taste test will claim it as their favorite hickory nut. Most dendrologists don't eat hickory nuts, so they don't care about this confusion. But for us foragers, it matters. I'm done with the pignut nonsense-this tree is common hickory in my book, and it is delicious. To add another layer of confusion, botanists have long debated whether C. glabra is one highly variable species, or should be split into two This debate has less relevance to wild nutters; both forms have sweet kernels. 75 