TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS
(3 [i] IWE-153
Mockernut Carya tomentosa
8 with narrow crown and deeply furrowed bark-but normally the 7.
DESCRIPTION: Large hickory strips. a Twigs and buds are thick. Leaflets species by
ridges do not much peel larger, or hang the off undersides in and rachis distinguished from to other very thick. Nut
the tufts distal of fine 3 soft hoirs. Fruits large and elliptic, the husk moderately shell very
typically thick with prominent angles. Kernel proportionately small
are elongated and pointed on both ends, its with
locked lobes.
CONFUSING SPECIES: Black hickory tends to be smaller with smaller nuts. ridges Com-
mon hickory has thinner bark
and smaller nuts. These species are
very closely related and hybridize.
HABITAT: Mixed hardwood or
pine-hardwood forests on well-
drained soil. Native.
COMMENTS: These are difficult
to crack, and the lobes of the small
kernels are locked into the shell,
making them slow and tedious to
separate. They are okay for hickory
milk, although the shell proportion
is very high. Susceptible to weevils.
This is the most common hickory in
the Deep South. Despite the good
flavor and large size, its shelling
properties make mockernut one
of the least useful species.
Mockernut rachis close up,
9 Black hickory
Carya texana
3
3
IWE-157
DESCRIPTION: Small to medium-sized hickory with deeply furrowed bark and medium-
thick (wigs. Leaflets 5-7. Husks moderately thick and stiff. Nuts almost as broad as long
with thick shells, small kernels, and locked lobes.
HABITAT: oak. Most common in dry, hilly country. Associated with post oak, dwarf chinkapin
and redcedar. Native.
COMMENTS: weevils Like a drought-adapted The nuts are laborious to shell but store well and are good for hickory milk.
from either Over cross between common hickory and mockernut, this Highly susceptible to
Sand hicker one C. pallida large areas from the Ozarks south and west this is the most species can be hard to tell
is a similar species of dry sandy soils in the Southeast with common small leaves hickory and encountered. small nuts.
TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS (3 [i] IWE-153 Mockernut Carya tomentosa 8 with narrow crown and deeply furrowed bark-but normally the 7. DESCRIPTION: Large hickory strips. a Twigs and buds are thick. Leaflets species by ridges do not much peel larger, or hang the off undersides in and rachis distinguished from to other very thick. Nut the tufts distal of fine 3 soft hoirs. Fruits large and elliptic, the husk moderately shell very typically thick with prominent angles. Kernel proportionately small are elongated and pointed on both ends, its with locked lobes. CONFUSING SPECIES: Black hickory tends to be smaller with smaller nuts. ridges Com- mon hickory has thinner bark and smaller nuts. These species are very closely related and hybridize. HABITAT: Mixed hardwood or pine-hardwood forests on well- drained soil. Native. COMMENTS: These are difficult to crack, and the lobes of the small kernels are locked into the shell, making them slow and tedious to separate. They are okay for hickory milk, although the shell proportion is very high. Susceptible to weevils. This is the most common hickory in the Deep South. Despite the good flavor and large size, its shelling properties make mockernut one of the least useful species. Mockernut rachis close up, 9 Black hickory Carya texana 3 3 IWE-157 DESCRIPTION: Small to medium-sized hickory with deeply furrowed bark and medium- thick (wigs. Leaflets 5-7. Husks moderately thick and stiff. Nuts almost as broad as long with thick shells, small kernels, and locked lobes. HABITAT: oak. Most common in dry, hilly country. Associated with post oak, dwarf chinkapin and redcedar. Native. COMMENTS: weevils Like a drought-adapted The nuts are laborious to shell but store well and are good for hickory milk. from either Over cross between common hickory and mockernut, this Highly susceptible to Sand hicker one C. pallida large areas from the Ozarks south and west this is the most species can be hard to tell is a similar species of dry sandy soils in the Southeast with common small leaves hickory and encountered. small nuts. 