TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS
11 Beech
1
Fagus grandifolia 3 Fagaceae (Beech family)
QUICK CHECK: Small three-sided nuts, usually paired, in bristly husks; smooth, gray
bark. ID difficulty 1.
tree spreading by suckers. Trunks large and erect, the crowns slightly
DESCRIPTION: smooth, Large very thin with occasional warty nodules. Twigs slender, with
broad. Bark hairless. the buds gray, long and sharp. Leaves alternate, elliptic-ovate to lanceolate incurved
acuminate is hairless nearly so above with fine, soft hairs below. Secondary
zigzag, tips, 2.5-6" (6-15 cm) long, margins sharply but distantly serrated with
teeth. The surface spaced, depressed, or and run straight to the margins. Petioles 2-4% of blade length. pollinated, Dead
veins are often closely through the winter on young trees. Flowers (spring) small and unshowy, wind inside a
with leaves the male persist and female separate. Nuts 11-13 mm long with pliable 3-sided shells, borne in pairs
bristly husk that splits open.
HABITAT: Mixed hardwood forests, preferring rich but well-drained soil. Associated with red oak and sugar
maple. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather nuts as they fall to the ground about the time that the leaves drop in autumn. Crack a
few open to check for empties, which are often prevalent. Shell by teeth, with a nutcracker, or between two
cutting boards. Store by drying in the shell. Beechnuts make a good snack or addition to hot cereal or baked
goods. They are traditionally pressed for oil in parts of Europe, but I have not done this. Young leaves are
marginally edible in early spring. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: These are delicious nuts; unfortunately they do not often produce heavy crops and are hard
to shell due to the small size. This is another native tree being decimated by exotic disease-two of them in
fact: beech bark disease and beech leaf disease.
Young beech leaves.
76
TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS 11 Beech 1 Fagus grandifolia 3 Fagaceae (Beech family) QUICK CHECK: Small three-sided nuts, usually paired, in bristly husks; smooth, gray bark. ID difficulty 1. tree spreading by suckers. Trunks large and erect, the crowns slightly DESCRIPTION: smooth, Large very thin with occasional warty nodules. Twigs slender, with broad. Bark hairless. the buds gray, long and sharp. Leaves alternate, elliptic-ovate to lanceolate incurved acuminate is hairless nearly so above with fine, soft hairs below. Secondary zigzag, tips, 2.5-6" (6-15 cm) long, margins sharply but distantly serrated with teeth. The surface spaced, depressed, or and run straight to the margins. Petioles 2-4% of blade length. pollinated, Dead veins are often closely through the winter on young trees. Flowers (spring) small and unshowy, wind inside a with leaves the male persist and female separate. Nuts 11-13 mm long with pliable 3-sided shells, borne in pairs bristly husk that splits open. HABITAT: Mixed hardwood forests, preferring rich but well-drained soil. Associated with red oak and sugar maple. Native. FOOD USE: Gather nuts as they fall to the ground about the time that the leaves drop in autumn. Crack a few open to check for empties, which are often prevalent. Shell by teeth, with a nutcracker, or between two cutting boards. Store by drying in the shell. Beechnuts make a good snack or addition to hot cereal or baked goods. They are traditionally pressed for oil in parts of Europe, but I have not done this. Young leaves are marginally edible in early spring. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: These are delicious nuts; unfortunately they do not often produce heavy crops and are hard to shell due to the small size. This is another native tree being decimated by exotic disease-two of them in fact: beech bark disease and beech leaf disease. Young beech leaves. 76 