TREES
AND
SHRUBS
WITH
NUTS
12 American chestnut
3
Castanea dentata
Fagaceae (Beech family)
QUICK CHECK: Lanceolate leaves sharply toothed; smooth-shellerl nuts in sharp spiny
husk. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Formerly a large, dominant tree, today native chestnuts survive almost
exclusively as stump sprouts, which rarely exceed 4" (10 cm) in diameter and 40' (12 m)
in height. Bark thin, smooth, and dark on sprouts, which usually have blight scars evident;
separating into broad, flat-topped ridges on older trees. Twigs smooth, shiny olive-green to brown with hny
white lenticels, the pith star-shaped in cross section. Buds are egg-shaped, tapered to a blunt point. Leaves alter-
nate, on petioles about 10% of blade length, lanceolate to narrowly elliptic, 5-9" (13-23 long, acute at the
base and tapered to a very sharp tip. Blades are hairless with 15-20 closely spaced secondary veins per side
depressed and running straight and unbroken to the margins where they terminate as a bristle. Margins have
widely spaced, long but narrow teeth, usually oriented toward the tip but hooking in toward the margin each
tooth tip with a thin bristle. Flowers (early summer) wind-pollinated, in stiff, semi-erect creamy catkins to 8
(20 cm) long, the male flowers more numerous, the female found near the base of some catkins. Husk 1.5-2 -
(4-6 cm) in diameter, densely covered with long, stiff, sharp spines; containing 2-4 nuts, these ripening in
mid fall, 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) wide with thin, smooth, brown, pliable shells, flattened on one or two sides.
hairy at the nipple-like tip.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Chinkapins are smaller trees or shrubs with roundish nuts borne one per husk.
HABITAT: Hardwood forests, especially on well-drained lightly
acidic slopes and ridges. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather nuts in autumn and use like domestic chest-
nuts. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This tree once dominated large sections of east-
ern forests but has been all but exterminated by an introduced
disease, chestnut blight, which first began spreading in the early
1900's. In some places extensive stands remain dominated by
chestnut stump sprouts, which may produce nuts for a few
years before being killed back by the blight. After a century of
failure at finding blight-resistant wild trees, the State University
of New York's forestry school at Syracuse has recently created
a population of fully blight-resistant American chestnuts by
adding a single gene from the wheat plant.
77
Blight scar on a chestnut sprout
TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS 12 American chestnut 3 Castanea dentata Fagaceae (Beech family) QUICK CHECK: Lanceolate leaves sharply toothed; smooth-shellerl nuts in sharp spiny husk. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Formerly a large, dominant tree, today native chestnuts survive almost exclusively as stump sprouts, which rarely exceed 4" (10 cm) in diameter and 40' (12 m) in height. Bark thin, smooth, and dark on sprouts, which usually have blight scars evident; separating into broad, flat-topped ridges on older trees. Twigs smooth, shiny olive-green to brown with hny white lenticels, the pith star-shaped in cross section. Buds are egg-shaped, tapered to a blunt point. Leaves alter- nate, on petioles about 10% of blade length, lanceolate to narrowly elliptic, 5-9" (13-23 long, acute at the base and tapered to a very sharp tip. Blades are hairless with 15-20 closely spaced secondary veins per side depressed and running straight and unbroken to the margins where they terminate as a bristle. Margins have widely spaced, long but narrow teeth, usually oriented toward the tip but hooking in toward the margin each tooth tip with a thin bristle. Flowers (early summer) wind-pollinated, in stiff, semi-erect creamy catkins to 8 (20 cm) long, the male flowers more numerous, the female found near the base of some catkins. Husk 1.5-2 - (4-6 cm) in diameter, densely covered with long, stiff, sharp spines; containing 2-4 nuts, these ripening in mid fall, 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) wide with thin, smooth, brown, pliable shells, flattened on one or two sides. hairy at the nipple-like tip. CONFUSING PLANTS: Chinkapins are smaller trees or shrubs with roundish nuts borne one per husk. HABITAT: Hardwood forests, especially on well-drained lightly acidic slopes and ridges. Native. FOOD USE: Gather nuts in autumn and use like domestic chest- nuts. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This tree once dominated large sections of east- ern forests but has been all but exterminated by an introduced disease, chestnut blight, which first began spreading in the early 1900's. In some places extensive stands remain dominated by chestnut stump sprouts, which may produce nuts for a few years before being killed back by the blight. After a century of failure at finding blight-resistant wild trees, the State University of New York's forestry school at Syracuse has recently created a population of fully blight-resistant American chestnuts by adding a single gene from the wheat plant. 77 Blight scar on a chestnut sprout 