TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS
HAZELNUT
Jun
LU
NG-197
genus Corylus
Betulaceae (Birch family)
QUICK in a leafy CHECK: husk. ID Tall difficulty clumping 1. shrubs with double-toothed ovate leaves and smooth shelled nuts wrapped
DESCRIPTION: the base. Bark Clump-forming shrubs 6-16' (2-5 m) tall, stems 0.6-2" (1.5-5 cm) thick,
near the base thin, grayish brown, slightly roughened. Leaves alternate, ovate, rounded mostly to unbranched
at and pointed at the tip, 2.5-4" (6.4-10 cm) long, hairy on both sides (more so below), heart-shaped with
toothed margins. Secondary veins depressed above and protruding below, running straight to the double-
where they end in a dominant tooth. Petioles 8-15% of blade length. Flowers tiny, wind pollinated in very margins early
spring; the male in hanging catkins, the female sessile with a cluster of bright red stigmas protruding from a
bud-like set of bracts. Nuts borne in ball-like clusters of up to 15, the cluster carrying several aborted nuts
Each nut is wrapped in a leafy involucre. The shells are hard, smooth, and light brown with a lighter zone at the
base, the kernel in one mass. We have 2 species, both native.
FOOD USE: Pick the green leafy clusters in late summer when
the nutshells have turned light brown. (Don't wait for the husks
to turn brown!) Wear gloves for collecting beaked hazel. Dry
the husks, dance on them in a barrel or gunnysack, then pick
the nuts out by hand. Before doing this you can singe the glo-
chids off of beaked hazelnuts. Once separated, the nuts can
be cracked, shelled, and used like domestic hazelnuts-but
they taste better. Wild hazelnuts make a fantastic nut milk.
They store up to 2 years in the shell, but once cracked should
be used within 3-5 months. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Although the bushes of these two species are
extremely similar, the nuts are initially handled quite differently.
Beaked hazelnut is more tedious to gather and husk. However,
Beaked hazelnuts in the top row; American
clean nuts and separated kernels are used almost identically.
hazel below.
W
14 Beaked hazel
Corylus cornuta
3
This species inhabits young or open woods
and brushy areas, especially with pine, oak,
birch, and aspen, on soils ranging from dry
to moist. The young twigs and petioles are not
covered with gland-tipped hairs. The dormant
male catkins are nearly sessile and often rigid.
Nuts ripen 1-2 weeks earlier than American hazel, wrapped
tightly in an involucre that is tubular and extended A (beak-like),
covered with stiff, irritating spines (glochids).
Male catkins of beaked hazel.
TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS HAZELNUT Jun LU NG-197 genus Corylus Betulaceae (Birch family) QUICK in a leafy CHECK: husk. ID Tall difficulty clumping 1. shrubs with double-toothed ovate leaves and smooth shelled nuts wrapped DESCRIPTION: the base. Bark Clump-forming shrubs 6-16' (2-5 m) tall, stems 0.6-2" (1.5-5 cm) thick, near the base thin, grayish brown, slightly roughened. Leaves alternate, ovate, rounded mostly to unbranched at and pointed at the tip, 2.5-4" (6.4-10 cm) long, hairy on both sides (more so below), heart-shaped with toothed margins. Secondary veins depressed above and protruding below, running straight to the double- where they end in a dominant tooth. Petioles 8-15% of blade length. Flowers tiny, wind pollinated in very margins early spring; the male in hanging catkins, the female sessile with a cluster of bright red stigmas protruding from a bud-like set of bracts. Nuts borne in ball-like clusters of up to 15, the cluster carrying several aborted nuts Each nut is wrapped in a leafy involucre. The shells are hard, smooth, and light brown with a lighter zone at the base, the kernel in one mass. We have 2 species, both native. FOOD USE: Pick the green leafy clusters in late summer when the nutshells have turned light brown. (Don't wait for the husks to turn brown!) Wear gloves for collecting beaked hazel. Dry the husks, dance on them in a barrel or gunnysack, then pick the nuts out by hand. Before doing this you can singe the glo- chids off of beaked hazelnuts. Once separated, the nuts can be cracked, shelled, and used like domestic hazelnuts-but they taste better. Wild hazelnuts make a fantastic nut milk. They store up to 2 years in the shell, but once cracked should be used within 3-5 months. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Although the bushes of these two species are extremely similar, the nuts are initially handled quite differently. Beaked hazelnut is more tedious to gather and husk. However, Beaked hazelnuts in the top row; American clean nuts and separated kernels are used almost identically. hazel below. W 14 Beaked hazel Corylus cornuta 3 This species inhabits young or open woods and brushy areas, especially with pine, oak, birch, and aspen, on soils ranging from dry to moist. The young twigs and petioles are not covered with gland-tipped hairs. The dormant male catkins are nearly sessile and often rigid. Nuts ripen 1-2 weeks earlier than American hazel, wrapped tightly in an involucre that is tubular and extended A (beak-like), covered with stiff, irritating spines (glochids). Male catkins of beaked hazel. 