TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS
13 Chinkapin 83
Castanea pumila + Fagaceae (Beech family)
Strubby tree or bush, narrow leaves with bristle-tipped 2. teeth and single,
QUICK CHECK shelled nuis IN a lusk with long, sharp spines. ID difficulty
smooth Small tree or large shrub, often with multiple leaning trunks eventually from the
DESCRIPTION: about 30 (9 m) in height. Bark smooth on young stems, gray, (8-15 cm) long,
becoming base reaching flaky with rather narrow fissures. and stiff, Buds lanceolate blunt, egg-shaped. or narrowly Leaves elliptic, 3-6" tapered to the base, Margins the tip sharp, coarsely the
dentate underside simple alternate. with pale spine-tipped from (1 coating tough teeth of fine curved wool. (10-15 Secondary back cm) toward long. veins the Husk leaf. straight, spiny, Petioles numerous, 1.5" (4 5% cm) of depressed. blade in diameter, length. splitting Flowers in (early two.
Nuts summer) 0.3-0.7' tiny. (8-18 in creamy mm) catkins long, borne 4-6" one per husk, the shell chocolate brown, pliable, and rounded.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Chinkapin
oak Quercus muehlenbergii and dwarf
chinkapin oak Q. prinoides have similar
leaves but their acorns are borne in cups.
HABITAT: Hardwood forests and forest
edges in sandy or dry, well-drained soil.
Native.
FOOD USE: Nuts ripen in autumn and
can be gathered and used like small
chestnuts. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This species, like its
larger cousin the American chestnut,
has been decimated by chestnut blight.
RELATED EDIBLE: Ozark chinkapin
C. ozarkensis is very similar but has
shorter leaves.
78
TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS 13 Chinkapin 83 Castanea pumila + Fagaceae (Beech family) Strubby tree or bush, narrow leaves with bristle-tipped 2. teeth and single, QUICK CHECK shelled nuis IN a lusk with long, sharp spines. ID difficulty smooth Small tree or large shrub, often with multiple leaning trunks eventually from the DESCRIPTION: about 30 (9 m) in height. Bark smooth on young stems, gray, (8-15 cm) long, becoming base reaching flaky with rather narrow fissures. and stiff, Buds lanceolate blunt, egg-shaped. or narrowly Leaves elliptic, 3-6" tapered to the base, Margins the tip sharp, coarsely the dentate underside simple alternate. with pale spine-tipped from (1 coating tough teeth of fine curved wool. (10-15 Secondary back cm) toward long. veins the Husk leaf. straight, spiny, Petioles numerous, 1.5" (4 5% cm) of depressed. blade in diameter, length. splitting Flowers in (early two. Nuts summer) 0.3-0.7' tiny. (8-18 in creamy mm) catkins long, borne 4-6" one per husk, the shell chocolate brown, pliable, and rounded. CONFUSING PLANTS: Chinkapin oak Quercus muehlenbergii and dwarf chinkapin oak Q. prinoides have similar leaves but their acorns are borne in cups. HABITAT: Hardwood forests and forest edges in sandy or dry, well-drained soil. Native. FOOD USE: Nuts ripen in autumn and can be gathered and used like small chestnuts. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This species, like its larger cousin the American chestnut, has been decimated by chestnut blight. RELATED EDIBLE: Ozark chinkapin C. ozarkensis is very similar but has shorter leaves. 78 