SHRUBS
WITH
NUTS
OAK
genus Quercus
Fagaceae (Beech family)
ID difficulty 1.
QUICK CHECK: Nuts with a smooth, pliable shell and nipple-like tip, borne singly in a cup-like structure
COLLECTIVE DESCRIPTION: Trees or shrubs, about 50 species native to our region, with highly variable
leaf forms and ecological roles. Bark roughened in mature trees by plates, blocks, flakes, or fissures. Twigs
moderately thick with winter buds clustered near the tips. Leaves alternate, simple, borne on short petioles.
Blades thick and tough; the variable shapes include deeply pinnately lobed, ovate and toothed, and elliptic
and entire. Veins pinnate, mostly flat above. Flowers wind-pollinated in spring. Male flowers hang in limp
catkins, while the female are attached directly to the twigs or on short stalks, singly or in small groups. Fruit a
spherical to elongated nut (acorn), radially symmetrical with a nipple-like tip and a thin, smooth, flexible shell,
borne singly in a scaly cup (the scales sometimes supporting hair-like burs). At the bottom of the nut is a
wide, light-colored zone of attachment. The nutmeat is creamy, yellowish, or bright orange, divided into two
cotyledons (sometimes unequally), the surface smooth or with a few folds or convolutions, covered with a
thin skin (testa) that is sometimes hairy.
ECOLOGY: Most oaks are associated with fire and are drought-tolerant, although some are swamp trees.
Generally they dominate slightly poorer soils than mesic trees such as maple, ash, elm, buckeye, and basswood.
Oaks often occur in association with pines and hickories. All the species listed here are native.
FOOD USE: All acorns are edible but contain tannins which should be leached from the nutmeats before
they are eaten in a serving-size quantity. Acorn size has a large impact on labor-efficiency, so the species
highlighted here are mostly those with larger acorns. You can shell acorns immediately or dry them first.
After shelling they can be hot-leached by boiling in several water changes, whole or chopped into smaller
pieces. Hot-leached acorns can be used like beans in chili, or they can be dried and ground into a flour that
can be mixed with other flours for baking. Acorns can also be cold-leached by grinding them into a fine flour
and soaking in several changes of cold water or percolating water through them. Cold-leached flour can fresh be
baked into a cheese-like food that is hearty and filling. Korean starch extraction involves pulverizing
meats in a wet blender and percolating cold water through the fine material; the starch granules extract are oil.
acorn settled by gravity out of the percolated water. Some acorns can also be pressed or boiled to of acorns in
then hard to generalize about the use of acorns as food because there are 3 main types or groups lumped together
It is each with distinct physical and chemical characteristics. Though traditionally that we traditionally split
as our "acorns," region, these groups differ far more than many other groups of edible plants
up. GROUP: These 10-12 species have mostly medium-sized acorns unequal (but on two cotyledons, species
Conservation 1.
RED (BLACK) OAK yellow flesh, a velvety-hairy inner cup lining, and to high; oil
they are large). They have creamy meeting to with curved or angled faces. Tannin levels are moderate readily in the
often with a large These convolution, take two years to develop on the tree and germinate hot-leached in spring. or They cold-leached dry flour.
shell; once dried they the acorns small to large, longer than broad, with lining is not
levels moderate. keep for several years. They are ideal for making creamy-colored
WHITE flesh, having OAK nearly GROUP: equal About cotyledons 25 species, meeting difficult with to flat dry faces in the and shell. lacking When convolutions; dried they the are cup harder season than and red
hairy. oaks acorns. Large acorns Tannin of levels they this group are rancidify moderately are after more a low year to or high; two oil in levels storage. are They low. are These ideal develop for hot-leached in one or cold-
leached germinate flour in and Korean starch processing.
autumn;
broad
or
broader
than
long,
as
ORANGE FLESH dark GROUP: shells. These The flesh 12-15 is bright species orange have acorns. (fading small Like to to white tiny dull yellow-orange acorns, oaks, the cotyledons when seasons, dry). are approximately They grow are from high
mostly with very oil (35-55%) than other they develop over two leached and
equal, in tannin meet and with much flat hairs, higher faces, and in and germinate lack convolutions. in spring. taxonomists. They Like red are oaks, ideal for making oil and can also be
a eaten. cup with This velvety group is not widely recognized by
81
SHRUBS WITH NUTS OAK genus Quercus Fagaceae (Beech family) ID difficulty 1. QUICK CHECK: Nuts with a smooth, pliable shell and nipple-like tip, borne singly in a cup-like structure COLLECTIVE DESCRIPTION: Trees or shrubs, about 50 species native to our region, with highly variable leaf forms and ecological roles. Bark roughened in mature trees by plates, blocks, flakes, or fissures. Twigs moderately thick with winter buds clustered near the tips. Leaves alternate, simple, borne on short petioles. Blades thick and tough; the variable shapes include deeply pinnately lobed, ovate and toothed, and elliptic and entire. Veins pinnate, mostly flat above. Flowers wind-pollinated in spring. Male flowers hang in limp catkins, while the female are attached directly to the twigs or on short stalks, singly or in small groups. Fruit a spherical to elongated nut (acorn), radially symmetrical with a nipple-like tip and a thin, smooth, flexible shell, borne singly in a scaly cup (the scales sometimes supporting hair-like burs). At the bottom of the nut is a wide, light-colored zone of attachment. The nutmeat is creamy, yellowish, or bright orange, divided into two cotyledons (sometimes unequally), the surface smooth or with a few folds or convolutions, covered with a thin skin (testa) that is sometimes hairy. ECOLOGY: Most oaks are associated with fire and are drought-tolerant, although some are swamp trees. Generally they dominate slightly poorer soils than mesic trees such as maple, ash, elm, buckeye, and basswood. Oaks often occur in association with pines and hickories. All the species listed here are native. FOOD USE: All acorns are edible but contain tannins which should be leached from the nutmeats before they are eaten in a serving-size quantity. Acorn size has a large impact on labor-efficiency, so the species highlighted here are mostly those with larger acorns. You can shell acorns immediately or dry them first. After shelling they can be hot-leached by boiling in several water changes, whole or chopped into smaller pieces. Hot-leached acorns can be used like beans in chili, or they can be dried and ground into a flour that can be mixed with other flours for baking. Acorns can also be cold-leached by grinding them into a fine flour and soaking in several changes of cold water or percolating water through them. Cold-leached flour can fresh be baked into a cheese-like food that is hearty and filling. Korean starch extraction involves pulverizing meats in a wet blender and percolating cold water through the fine material; the starch granules extract are oil. acorn settled by gravity out of the percolated water. Some acorns can also be pressed or boiled to of acorns in then hard to generalize about the use of acorns as food because there are 3 main types or groups lumped together It is each with distinct physical and chemical characteristics. Though traditionally that we traditionally split as our "acorns," region, these groups differ far more than many other groups of edible plants up. GROUP: These 10-12 species have mostly medium-sized acorns unequal (but on two cotyledons, species Conservation 1. RED (BLACK) OAK yellow flesh, a velvety-hairy inner cup lining, and to high; oil they are large). They have creamy meeting to with curved or angled faces. Tannin levels are moderate readily in the often with a large These convolution, take two years to develop on the tree and germinate hot-leached in spring. or They cold-leached dry flour. shell; once dried they the acorns small to large, longer than broad, with lining is not levels moderate. keep for several years. They are ideal for making creamy-colored WHITE flesh, having OAK nearly GROUP: equal About cotyledons 25 species, meeting difficult with to flat dry faces in the and shell. lacking When convolutions; dried they the are cup harder season than and red hairy. oaks acorns. Large acorns Tannin of levels they this group are rancidify moderately are after more a low year to or high; two oil in levels storage. are They low. are These ideal develop for hot-leached in one or cold- leached germinate flour in and Korean starch processing. autumn; broad or broader than long, as ORANGE FLESH dark GROUP: shells. These The flesh 12-15 is bright species orange have acorns. (fading small Like to to white tiny dull yellow-orange acorns, oaks, the cotyledons when seasons, dry). are approximately They grow are from high mostly with very oil (35-55%) than other they develop over two leached and equal, in tannin meet and with much flat hairs, higher faces, and in and germinate lack convolutions. in spring. taxonomists. They Like red are oaks, ideal for making oil and can also be a eaten. cup with This velvety group is not widely recognized by 81 