16 Water oak
Quercus nigra
1
Medium-sized oak, erect with a dominant single trunk. Bark (3.8-10 hard, mod- cm)
DESCRIPTION: erratic plates or low scaly ridges. Leaves 1.5-4" wide at the
erately thick. dark forming shape often entire, occasionally lobed, but always falling slowly
long and highly variable the base. in They are tough and semi-evergreen, usually squat,
tip and tapered of to the winter. Acorns (orange flesh group) are very small, broad, and often
in over shallow the course cups. the bases nearly flat, the ends rounded, the shell dark brown
striped. the flesh bright orange.
HABITAT: Most common in high parts of floodplains and woodlots or fencerows on flat land, especially where
poorly drained or with clay soil. Common as a yard and park tree.
COMMENTS: The kernels are about 50% oil, which can be extracted by pressing or boiling. The oil is not
bitter (tannin is not oil-soluble) and is beautifully orange like the nut's flesh. Here is an untapped native
food crop available in enormous quantities. Other high-oil species include Q. imbricaria (below), Q. phellos,
Q hemisphaerica, Q. falcata, and several others.
17 Shingle oak Quercus imbricaria
1
QUICK CHECK: Oak with large, entire leaves that are hairy on the underside; small acorns.
DESCRIPTION: Medium-sized oak with an erect single trunk and narrow crown. Bark hard,
dark, and covered in low plates. Leaves entire and elliptic, 4-7" (10-18 cm) long, the tip with
a bristle, the hanging on late through the winter. The blade is shiny above with soft brown
across. on underside. Acorns (orange flesh group) dark and nearly round, up to 0.7" (1.8 wool cm)
HABITAT: Fertile
suils, moderately dry
to moist, especially
high floodplains, lower
slopes, and clay flats.
COMMENTS: This
15 a good candidate
for extracting oil It
is the northernmost
of our high-oil acorns
and has the largest
nuts in the "pump-
kin-flesh" group Of
all the entire-leaved
oak species in North
America a, this one has
the largest leaves
82
16 Water oak Quercus nigra 1 Medium-sized oak, erect with a dominant single trunk. Bark (3.8-10 hard, mod- cm) DESCRIPTION: erratic plates or low scaly ridges. Leaves 1.5-4" wide at the erately thick. dark forming shape often entire, occasionally lobed, but always falling slowly long and highly variable the base. in They are tough and semi-evergreen, usually squat, tip and tapered of to the winter. Acorns (orange flesh group) are very small, broad, and often in over shallow the course cups. the bases nearly flat, the ends rounded, the shell dark brown striped. the flesh bright orange. HABITAT: Most common in high parts of floodplains and woodlots or fencerows on flat land, especially where poorly drained or with clay soil. Common as a yard and park tree. COMMENTS: The kernels are about 50% oil, which can be extracted by pressing or boiling. The oil is not bitter (tannin is not oil-soluble) and is beautifully orange like the nut's flesh. Here is an untapped native food crop available in enormous quantities. Other high-oil species include Q. imbricaria (below), Q. phellos, Q hemisphaerica, Q. falcata, and several others. 17 Shingle oak Quercus imbricaria 1 QUICK CHECK: Oak with large, entire leaves that are hairy on the underside; small acorns. DESCRIPTION: Medium-sized oak with an erect single trunk and narrow crown. Bark hard, dark, and covered in low plates. Leaves entire and elliptic, 4-7" (10-18 cm) long, the tip with a bristle, the hanging on late through the winter. The blade is shiny above with soft brown across. on underside. Acorns (orange flesh group) dark and nearly round, up to 0.7" (1.8 wool cm) HABITAT: Fertile suils, moderately dry to moist, especially high floodplains, lower slopes, and clay flats. COMMENTS: This 15 a good candidate for extracting oil It is the northernmost of our high-oil acorns and has the largest nuts in the "pump- kin-flesh" group Of all the entire-leaved oak species in North America a, this one has the largest leaves 82 