0
1cm
TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS
18 Northern red oak
Quercus rubra
2
DESCRIPTION:
Tall,
grac
eful
oak
Nith
dark
smooth bark when young, later developing arrate
ridges. It sheds its dead lower branc has and does
not hold its dead leaves in winter Leaves / 3
(10-23 cm) long with / 11 point-tipped lobes the
petiole about 40% of blade length. Acorns (red oak
group) to 1.2" (3 cm) long with flat, shallow cups
HABITAT: A variety of soils, but most abundant on moderately ach
sandy sites, where it often o-dominates with white oine or white TAK
The large acorns dry readily and are one of the most labor-efficient for shelling. it is the They only are species. good
COMMENTS: leaching. This is the most common oak in many areas, and in some regions North America with
for hot or cold similar Shumard oak are the only members of the red oak group in eastern often striped) acorns
This large and acorns. the very Several species have leaves with fewer lobes and similar but smaller (and
Quercus alba
1
2
NG-150
19 White oak
tree with a broad crown of spreading or ascending cm) long, branches. hair-
DESCRIPTION: Large peeling off in loose, flat strips. Leaves 4-7" (10-18 oak group) oval
Bark light gray, flaky, round-tipped lobes. Acorns (white covering less
or less elliptic, or nearly to 1" so, (2.5 with cm) long, long, narrow, smooth and brown or purplish brown, in cups
than a third of the nut.
HABITAT: Well-drained is our most prevalent oak. The acorns are medium-sized while still but on often the tree. very abundant. They
soil, especially loamy sand and sandstone ridges.
COMMENTS: are so eager to This germinate that they can sometimes be seen sprouting
03
Newly emerging white oak leaves with Hower buds
0 1cm TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS 18 Northern red oak Quercus rubra 2 DESCRIPTION: Tall, grac eful oak Nith dark smooth bark when young, later developing arrate ridges. It sheds its dead lower branc has and does not hold its dead leaves in winter Leaves / 3 (10-23 cm) long with / 11 point-tipped lobes the petiole about 40% of blade length. Acorns (red oak group) to 1.2" (3 cm) long with flat, shallow cups HABITAT: A variety of soils, but most abundant on moderately ach sandy sites, where it often o-dominates with white oine or white TAK The large acorns dry readily and are one of the most labor-efficient for shelling. it is the They only are species. good COMMENTS: leaching. This is the most common oak in many areas, and in some regions North America with for hot or cold similar Shumard oak are the only members of the red oak group in eastern often striped) acorns This large and acorns. the very Several species have leaves with fewer lobes and similar but smaller (and Quercus alba 1 2 NG-150 19 White oak tree with a broad crown of spreading or ascending cm) long, branches. hair- DESCRIPTION: Large peeling off in loose, flat strips. Leaves 4-7" (10-18 oak group) oval Bark light gray, flaky, round-tipped lobes. Acorns (white covering less or less elliptic, or nearly to 1" so, (2.5 with cm) long, long, narrow, smooth and brown or purplish brown, in cups than a third of the nut. HABITAT: Well-drained is our most prevalent oak. The acorns are medium-sized while still but on often the tree. very abundant. They soil, especially loamy sand and sandstone ridges. COMMENTS: are so eager to This germinate that they can sometimes be seen sprouting 03 Newly emerging white oak leaves with Hower buds 