TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS
22 Chestnut oak
Quercus montana
1
2
NG it,1
me
DESCRIPTION: Large tree with a narrower crown than
others in the white oak group. Bark dark, deeply furrowed.
and blocky (reminiscent of the red oak group) Leaves 4 6
(10-15 cm) long, obovate to elliptic, with very large, blunt
teeth. Acorns (white oak group) oblong, up to 1.3" (33 mm)
long, about one-third enclosed by the cup.
HABITAT: Well-drained rocky soil, especially on mountains and hills. Formerly
grew with American chestnut, which it has partly replaced on the same tes
COMMENTS: The acorns are large, high in tannin, and often produced profusely
23 Southern live oak + Quercus virginiana
1
2
NG-158
DESCRIPTION: Short trunk and spreading or leaning form in the open; taller and more
erect in the forest. Bark dark, with deep, narrow furrows between blocky, slightly flaky
ridges. Leaves tough and evergreen (dropping in spring), 1.4-4" (3.5-10 cm) long, tooth nar- or
bump, rowly down-curved. The lower surface is densely pubescent. Acorns (white nut.
elliptic, blunt-tipped. Margins entire, sometimes wavy or rarely with oak a group)
medium-sized, oblong, dark brown, the cup enclosing half or less of the
HABITAT: Sandy but moist soil, especially along floodplains, borders of coastal wetlands, and other fiat species areas
COMMENTS: Live oak can be a prolific acorn producer. It is often the best oak in its area, where most
of acorns are small.
85
TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS 22 Chestnut oak Quercus montana 1 2 NG it,1 me DESCRIPTION: Large tree with a narrower crown than others in the white oak group. Bark dark, deeply furrowed. and blocky (reminiscent of the red oak group) Leaves 4 6 (10-15 cm) long, obovate to elliptic, with very large, blunt teeth. Acorns (white oak group) oblong, up to 1.3" (33 mm) long, about one-third enclosed by the cup. HABITAT: Well-drained rocky soil, especially on mountains and hills. Formerly grew with American chestnut, which it has partly replaced on the same tes COMMENTS: The acorns are large, high in tannin, and often produced profusely 23 Southern live oak + Quercus virginiana 1 2 NG-158 DESCRIPTION: Short trunk and spreading or leaning form in the open; taller and more erect in the forest. Bark dark, with deep, narrow furrows between blocky, slightly flaky ridges. Leaves tough and evergreen (dropping in spring), 1.4-4" (3.5-10 cm) long, tooth nar- or bump, rowly down-curved. The lower surface is densely pubescent. Acorns (white nut. elliptic, blunt-tipped. Margins entire, sometimes wavy or rarely with oak a group) medium-sized, oblong, dark brown, the cup enclosing half or less of the HABITAT: Sandy but moist soil, especially along floodplains, borders of coastal wetlands, and other fiat species areas COMMENTS: Live oak can be a prolific acorn producer. It is often the best oak in its area, where most of acorns are small. 85 