TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS
1
2
NG-152
20 Bur oak
Quercus
macrocarpa
branches
and
a
short
DESCRIPTION: arge tree with numerous spreading deeply furrowed. and ascending not flaky but often sloughing sinuses
trunk when the base grown Leaves in the 2-8' open (8-20 Bark cm) gray long and with broad blunt distal lobes, half. typically The surface with deep is dark green
off in the at oximal half and shallow with sinuses minute. in the fine hairs on the underside. in size, from Acorns 0.4-1.6" (white (1-4
oak above group) and light broadly greenish-gray elliptic dull gray-brown. 60-95% and extremely has a fringe variable of soft curly awns or "burs."
cm)
long
The
encloses
the
nut
cup
HABITAT: In prairies and prairie edges; this was the quintessential oak savannah tree. Also scattered in high
parts of floodplains or rich hardwood forests, particularly in flat areas of clay soil.
COMMENTS: In its northernmost range bur oak acorns are quite small, but in the southern US they can be
enermous-probably the largest acorn in North America. Bur oak acorns are very resistant to drying. Overcup
oak Q. lyrata is a similar species of southern floodplains with a bur-less husk completely enclosing the acorn.
21 Basket oak
Quercus michauxii
1
2
DESCRIPTION: Large. straight-growing tree. Bark light gray, flaky, resembling white oak.
Leaves 4-8' (10-20 cm) long, obovate, unlobed but with large, blunt teeth (somewhat
resembling chestnut leaves). Acorns (white oak group) 0.8-1.5" (2-4 cm) long, longer
that wide dark gray-brown, about half enclosed by the cup.
HABITAT: Bottomlands, upper floodplain forests, flat rich lands. Associated with bur oak,
swamp white oak, pecan, honeylocust, silver maple, and sycamore.
COMMENTS: This tree has consistently large acorns that fall from their husks readily, making them among
the basiest species to harvest and process-but they are almost never weevil-free. AKA swamp chestnut oak.
Swamp write oak G bicolor is à similar species with smaller, long-stalked acorns.
84
TREES AND SHRUBS WITH NUTS 1 2 NG-152 20 Bur oak Quercus macrocarpa branches and a short DESCRIPTION: arge tree with numerous spreading deeply furrowed. and ascending not flaky but often sloughing sinuses trunk when the base grown Leaves in the 2-8' open (8-20 Bark cm) gray long and with broad blunt distal lobes, half. typically The surface with deep is dark green off in the at oximal half and shallow with sinuses minute. in the fine hairs on the underside. in size, from Acorns 0.4-1.6" (white (1-4 oak above group) and light broadly greenish-gray elliptic dull gray-brown. 60-95% and extremely has a fringe variable of soft curly awns or "burs." cm) long The encloses the nut cup HABITAT: In prairies and prairie edges; this was the quintessential oak savannah tree. Also scattered in high parts of floodplains or rich hardwood forests, particularly in flat areas of clay soil. COMMENTS: In its northernmost range bur oak acorns are quite small, but in the southern US they can be enermous-probably the largest acorn in North America. Bur oak acorns are very resistant to drying. Overcup oak Q. lyrata is a similar species of southern floodplains with a bur-less husk completely enclosing the acorn. 21 Basket oak Quercus michauxii 1 2 DESCRIPTION: Large. straight-growing tree. Bark light gray, flaky, resembling white oak. Leaves 4-8' (10-20 cm) long, obovate, unlobed but with large, blunt teeth (somewhat resembling chestnut leaves). Acorns (white oak group) 0.8-1.5" (2-4 cm) long, longer that wide dark gray-brown, about half enclosed by the cup. HABITAT: Bottomlands, upper floodplain forests, flat rich lands. Associated with bur oak, swamp white oak, pecan, honeylocust, silver maple, and sycamore. COMMENTS: This tree has consistently large acorns that fall from their husks readily, making them among the basiest species to harvest and process-but they are almost never weevil-free. AKA swamp chestnut oak. Swamp write oak G bicolor is à similar species with smaller, long-stalked acorns. 84 