TREES OR SHRUBS WITH LARGE!!
GROUP 6 TREES OR SHRUBS WITH LARGE FLESHY belong FRUITS to a plant (OVER in 0.8"/ 2 CM)
group Since fruit 7, 10, size or 11. varies, For all any of the fruit species close to in the this 2 group, cm threshold the fruit may is the also primary food product.
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 6
The key is not your final answer!
1. Rugosa rose
Leaf
Leaf compound. pinnately compound with 7-9 leaflets; fruit smooth and red, ending in a large 5-part calyx.
2. Trifeliate orange
or
Leaf ternately compound: fruit downy with no end calyx.
Leaf simple.
Leaf entire.
Fruit with a stiff basal calyx almost as wide as the fruit.
3. Persimmon
Ripe fruit dull orange, skin hairless.
4. Black persimmon
or
Ripe fruit black, skin covered with minute wool.
or
Fruit with no calyx.
5. Pawpaw
Fruit mango to kidney shaped, green, pulpy; dark seeds to 0.8" (2 cm).
Fruit softball-sized, green and hard, the surface brain-like. Osage orange (not edible).
6. Ogeechee tupelo
Fruit elongated, spongy, with a single, elongated, woody. ridged seed.
Leaf toothed.
Fruit firm. with multiple seeds in a core, and a 5-lobed end calyx.
Tree thorny: fruit sticky. yellow-green with black spots, less than 2" (5 cm) diameter.
7, American crabapple
Tree not thorny; fruit not sticky.
or
Fruit more than 2" (5 cm) and usually less than 7 per umbel.
8. Apple
Fruit less than 1.5" (4 cm), often more than 8 per umbel.
9. Eurasian crabappie
Fruit soft when ripe, with no calyx; one large, hard, clam-shaped stone.
10. Wild plum
1
Rugosa rose
2
3
Rosa rugosa Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK CHECK: Thorny bushes with pinnately compound leaves and toothed leaflets;
large shiny red fruit with a prominent calyx at the tip. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Thicket-forming bush spreading by rhizomes. Stems and twigs densely
covered with straight prickles and fine woolly hairs. Leaves alternate, pinnately compound
with 7-9 leaflets. Petioles finely hairy with a broad stipule attached to the lower part.
Leaflets sessile or nearly 50, ovate to elliptic, blunt pointed, 1-1.8" (2.5-4.5 cm), the margins
serrated with blunt teeth. Midvein, secondary veins, and veinlets all strongly depressed
Widely planted
above, resulting in a rough (rugose) surface. Flowers 2-4" (5-10 cm) wide, with 5 long,
ornamentally but
feral mostly in
pointed, triangular green sepals and 5 broad, pink petals. Pedicel long
the mapped area.
woolly. Fruit a hip up to 2" (5 cm) wide, with smooth, waxy, bright red
skin and a prominent calyx at the tip. The hip is pulpy and hollow in the center, where the
seeds reside mixed with loose, stiff hairs.
HABITAT: Sandy seashore dunes and upper beaches in full
sun. Occasional inland. Introduced.
FOOD USE: See p.142 for a general discussion of roses, The
hips of this species are among the best in flavor, and their large
size makes for labor-efficient pulp separation. The flower
petals are also large and easy to gather.
COMMENTS: Since this is the largest of our roses it has
easiest hips to use. The flesh has very good flavor. In the
dance. seashore areas these hips can be gathered in remarkable some
86
This species is often erroneously called "beach plum." abun-
TREES OR SHRUBS WITH LARGE!! GROUP 6 TREES OR SHRUBS WITH LARGE FLESHY belong FRUITS to a plant (OVER in 0.8"/ 2 CM) group Since fruit 7, 10, size or 11. varies, For all any of the fruit species close to in the this 2 group, cm threshold the fruit may is the also primary food product. TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 6 The key is not your final answer! 1. Rugosa rose Leaf Leaf compound. pinnately compound with 7-9 leaflets; fruit smooth and red, ending in a large 5-part calyx. 2. Trifeliate orange or Leaf ternately compound: fruit downy with no end calyx. Leaf simple. Leaf entire. Fruit with a stiff basal calyx almost as wide as the fruit. 3. Persimmon Ripe fruit dull orange, skin hairless. 4. Black persimmon or Ripe fruit black, skin covered with minute wool. or Fruit with no calyx. 5. Pawpaw Fruit mango to kidney shaped, green, pulpy; dark seeds to 0.8" (2 cm). Fruit softball-sized, green and hard, the surface brain-like. Osage orange (not edible). 6. Ogeechee tupelo Fruit elongated, spongy, with a single, elongated, woody. ridged seed. Leaf toothed. Fruit firm. with multiple seeds in a core, and a 5-lobed end calyx. Tree thorny: fruit sticky. yellow-green with black spots, less than 2" (5 cm) diameter. 7, American crabapple Tree not thorny; fruit not sticky. or Fruit more than 2" (5 cm) and usually less than 7 per umbel. 8. Apple Fruit less than 1.5" (4 cm), often more than 8 per umbel. 9. Eurasian crabappie Fruit soft when ripe, with no calyx; one large, hard, clam-shaped stone. 10. Wild plum 1 Rugosa rose 2 3 Rosa rugosa Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK CHECK: Thorny bushes with pinnately compound leaves and toothed leaflets; large shiny red fruit with a prominent calyx at the tip. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Thicket-forming bush spreading by rhizomes. Stems and twigs densely covered with straight prickles and fine woolly hairs. Leaves alternate, pinnately compound with 7-9 leaflets. Petioles finely hairy with a broad stipule attached to the lower part. Leaflets sessile or nearly 50, ovate to elliptic, blunt pointed, 1-1.8" (2.5-4.5 cm), the margins serrated with blunt teeth. Midvein, secondary veins, and veinlets all strongly depressed Widely planted above, resulting in a rough (rugose) surface. Flowers 2-4" (5-10 cm) wide, with 5 long, ornamentally but feral mostly in pointed, triangular green sepals and 5 broad, pink petals. Pedicel long the mapped area. woolly. Fruit a hip up to 2" (5 cm) wide, with smooth, waxy, bright red skin and a prominent calyx at the tip. The hip is pulpy and hollow in the center, where the seeds reside mixed with loose, stiff hairs. HABITAT: Sandy seashore dunes and upper beaches in full sun. Occasional inland. Introduced. FOOD USE: See p.142 for a general discussion of roses, The hips of this species are among the best in flavor, and their large size makes for labor-efficient pulp separation. The flower petals are also large and easy to gather. COMMENTS: Since this is the largest of our roses it has easiest hips to use. The flesh has very good flavor. In the dance. seashore areas these hips can be gathered in remarkable some 86 This species is often erroneously called "beach plum." abun- 