TREES OR SHRUBS WITH-LARGE FLESHY FRUITS (OVER 0.8" / 2 CM)
2 Trifoliate orange O2
Citrus trifoliata
family Rutaceae
QUICK CHECK: Thick flattened twigs with smooth green bark and large thorns, tim
pound leaves with three leaflets; round, dull, velvety fruit. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Large shrub or small tree, branching widely. Bark thin, older trunks
striped with gray-brown and green; branches and twigs uniformly green and smooth.
Branches zigzag and flattened, with numerous thorns 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) that are long, alternate,
flattened and green with brown, needle-like points. Leaves borne in thorn axils singly or in tufts of up to Sur
(most commonly three). Leaf compound, with usually 3 (rarely 4) leaflets, all of them sessile. Leaflets highly
aromatic, thin and often curled, obovate or elliptic, the tips blunt and often indented. The surfaces are hairless
Midveins raised above. Margins have small, blunt, obscure teeth-often appearing entire at a glance Petioles
50-80% of the terminal leaflet length, winged prominently. Flowers (spring) single or in pairs from the them
axils, 1.2-2.4" (3-6 cm) across with 4-7 sepals, 4-7 broad, white petals, and numerous stamens Fruit borne
on very short, stout pedicels, ripening to a dull yellowish in autumn, with a strong, somewhat rank sme this
spherical, 1-2" (2.5-5 cm), the surface downy and the rind tough, enclosing many large seeds and juice-there
is virtually no pulp.
HABITAT: Full sun to light shade in brushy areas such
as fence lines, forest margins, urban waste areas. and
parks. Introduced.
FOOD USE: The oranges have a very sour juice tndi
can be used like lemon juice, but it definitely has its own
twist. It is often derided for not being a real lemon, but
I think it makes a really good lemonade or flavoring for
carbonated water.
COMMENTS: An exotic, unexpected edible that is locally
abundant. Just watch out for those thorns! AKA hardy
orange, Poncirus trifoliata.
TREES OR SHRUBS WITH-LARGE FLESHY FRUITS (OVER 0.8" / 2 CM) 2 Trifoliate orange O2 Citrus trifoliata family Rutaceae QUICK CHECK: Thick flattened twigs with smooth green bark and large thorns, tim pound leaves with three leaflets; round, dull, velvety fruit. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Large shrub or small tree, branching widely. Bark thin, older trunks striped with gray-brown and green; branches and twigs uniformly green and smooth. Branches zigzag and flattened, with numerous thorns 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) that are long, alternate, flattened and green with brown, needle-like points. Leaves borne in thorn axils singly or in tufts of up to Sur (most commonly three). Leaf compound, with usually 3 (rarely 4) leaflets, all of them sessile. Leaflets highly aromatic, thin and often curled, obovate or elliptic, the tips blunt and often indented. The surfaces are hairless Midveins raised above. Margins have small, blunt, obscure teeth-often appearing entire at a glance Petioles 50-80% of the terminal leaflet length, winged prominently. Flowers (spring) single or in pairs from the them axils, 1.2-2.4" (3-6 cm) across with 4-7 sepals, 4-7 broad, white petals, and numerous stamens Fruit borne on very short, stout pedicels, ripening to a dull yellowish in autumn, with a strong, somewhat rank sme this spherical, 1-2" (2.5-5 cm), the surface downy and the rind tough, enclosing many large seeds and juice-there is virtually no pulp. HABITAT: Full sun to light shade in brushy areas such as fence lines, forest margins, urban waste areas. and parks. Introduced. FOOD USE: The oranges have a very sour juice tndi can be used like lemon juice, but it definitely has its own twist. It is often derided for not being a real lemon, but I think it makes a really good lemonade or flavoring for carbonated water. COMMENTS: An exotic, unexpected edible that is locally abundant. Just watch out for those thorns! AKA hardy orange, Poncirus trifoliata. 