TREES
3
IWE-253
3
Persimmon
Ebenaceae
(Persimmon
family)
Diospyros virginiana
QUICK CHECK: Soft, orange, pumpkin-shaped sessile fruit with a large, tough, 5-pointed
calyx. ID difficulty 1. medium-sized pioneer tree. Trunks usually single, in dominant, full sun.
DESCRIPTION: Small to 6-14" (15-36 cm) in diameter, the crown asymmetrically narrow even clustered
Bark 10-70' very (3-21 dark m) with tall with and thick, several well-separated on one side, blocks. and may Twigs detach often easily with the appearance; fruit. They new are gray twigs to are reddish hairy.
brown with orange pores and closely spaced 3-6" buds, (8-15 cm) long and about half as wide, ovate to larger veins
at the branch tips giving them a "squiggly" elliptic, the
Leaves alternate, deciduous, entire and semi-leathery, hairy, the blades flat, often with dark smudges. breaking Veins all up flat before above; the margin.
tip pointed, margins Secondary veins are light in color, 45-60° to the midvein, leaves are drooping, shiny, and
protrude below. blade length, faintly channeled. New spring bell-shaped, about
Petioles reddish, hairy, 1-20% female of separate trees in late spring, both genders sessile, while female
coppery. Flowers male with and 4-5 recurved on lobes. Male flowers are greenish-yellow, in small clusters, spherical,
0.4" cm) are across, borne singly and are yellowish to creamy. Fruit 0.8-2" (2-5 cm) in diameter, subtended roughly by a tough,
flowers in autumn to dull orange, often with black or bluish mottling on the very thin skin containing up
persistent ripening 5-pointed calyx. Flesh is dull orange and very soft when ripe, pulpy rather than juicy,
to 6 flattened, elliptic, brown seeds about 0.6" (1.5 cm) long.
HABITAT: Shade intolerant; found in young or open woods, rocky ridges, fencerows, stream valleys, high
parts of river floodplains, old fields, forest edges. Likes well-drained sites. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather the fruit from the tree or the ground when it is fully ripe and softened. Allow nearly-ripe
fruit to soften after picking. Even slightly unripe persimmons can leave a potent and unpleasant astringency
in the mouth. Ripening time varies greatly between trees, from late August to November. Persimmons can be
eaten raw, or the pulp can be separated from the seeds and used in baking much like pumpkin. The texture
changes dramatically when cooked. Dried or fresh leaves are used for tea. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Extremely prolific and often available by the bushel, fully ripe persimmons are delicious and
versatile. Unripe persimmons can look ripe to the uninitiated, but are an unpleasant experience not easily
forgotten. The wild fruit not only tastes better than cultivated persimmons, but is shockingly more nutrition-
ally dense. The leaves of Asian persimmon are sold commercially for tea.
88
TREES 3 IWE-253 3 Persimmon Ebenaceae (Persimmon family) Diospyros virginiana QUICK CHECK: Soft, orange, pumpkin-shaped sessile fruit with a large, tough, 5-pointed calyx. ID difficulty 1. medium-sized pioneer tree. Trunks usually single, in dominant, full sun. DESCRIPTION: Small to 6-14" (15-36 cm) in diameter, the crown asymmetrically narrow even clustered Bark 10-70' very (3-21 dark m) with tall with and thick, several well-separated on one side, blocks. and may Twigs detach often easily with the appearance; fruit. They new are gray twigs to are reddish hairy. brown with orange pores and closely spaced 3-6" buds, (8-15 cm) long and about half as wide, ovate to larger veins at the branch tips giving them a "squiggly" elliptic, the Leaves alternate, deciduous, entire and semi-leathery, hairy, the blades flat, often with dark smudges. breaking Veins all up flat before above; the margin. tip pointed, margins Secondary veins are light in color, 45-60° to the midvein, leaves are drooping, shiny, and protrude below. blade length, faintly channeled. New spring bell-shaped, about Petioles reddish, hairy, 1-20% female of separate trees in late spring, both genders sessile, while female coppery. Flowers male with and 4-5 recurved on lobes. Male flowers are greenish-yellow, in small clusters, spherical, 0.4" cm) are across, borne singly and are yellowish to creamy. Fruit 0.8-2" (2-5 cm) in diameter, subtended roughly by a tough, flowers in autumn to dull orange, often with black or bluish mottling on the very thin skin containing up persistent ripening 5-pointed calyx. Flesh is dull orange and very soft when ripe, pulpy rather than juicy, to 6 flattened, elliptic, brown seeds about 0.6" (1.5 cm) long. HABITAT: Shade intolerant; found in young or open woods, rocky ridges, fencerows, stream valleys, high parts of river floodplains, old fields, forest edges. Likes well-drained sites. Native. FOOD USE: Gather the fruit from the tree or the ground when it is fully ripe and softened. Allow nearly-ripe fruit to soften after picking. Even slightly unripe persimmons can leave a potent and unpleasant astringency in the mouth. Ripening time varies greatly between trees, from late August to November. Persimmons can be eaten raw, or the pulp can be separated from the seeds and used in baking much like pumpkin. The texture changes dramatically when cooked. Dried or fresh leaves are used for tea. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Extremely prolific and often available by the bushel, fully ripe persimmons are delicious and versatile. Unripe persimmons can look ripe to the uninitiated, but are an unpleasant experience not easily forgotten. The wild fruit not only tastes better than cultivated persimmons, but is shockingly more nutrition- ally dense. The leaves of Asian persimmon are sold commercially for tea. 88 