TREES OR SHRUBS WITH LARGE FLESHY FRUITS (OVER 0.8" / CM)
4
Black persimmon
093
Diospyros texanum Ebenaceae (Persimmon family)
QUICK CHECK: Small scrubby tree with very smooth light gray bask. or
mall, entire, leathery leaves; fruit like a black herry tomato ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Small tree (sometimes fruiting al shruh size) In 40 (1) m) tall, after
multi-trunked, scrubby and twisted, dense with stiff branches at broad angles Bark
smooth and thin, light gray, flaking off in paper-thin layers, the wood ridged or "muscly" very
Twigs red-brown to grayish with light lenticels, the new twigs finely hairy. Twigs are rougher and darker than
older trunks-opposite the situation on most trees. Leaves alternate, persisting at least into early Nicher
crowded at twig tips, mostly ascending, leathery, 0.7-2" (1.8-5 long. Blades entire, obovate or spoon shaned
with blunt tips that are rounded or occasionally notched, narrowed at the base, the margins rolled
Surface sparsely hairy and dark above, the veinlets slightly depressed; densely woolly and I ghter general
the underside. Secondary veins are scarcely evident. Petioles extremely short. Flowers (spring in sarly ilim
mer) male and female on separate trees, solitary or in small clusters. A calyx of 5 broad, thick lobez once
through fruiting. Corolla urn-shaped, greenish white, soft-hairy, 1 cm long with 5 spreading lobes often cotor
at the tip. Fruit spherical or slightly compressed, 0.7-1" (18-25 mm) across, green at first ripering sudde
to black, pulpy and juicy, the surface covered with minute wool, subtended by a 5-6 lobed caly/. Seeds
red-brown, semi-hard, 5-9 mm long, shaped like a lentil bulged on one side.
HABITAT: Rocky, hilly, well-drained, sunny sites, especially on limestone-derived soils. Native.
FOOD USE: Ripe fruit (late summer to early autumn) can be eaten
off the tree or the pulp used in baking or for fruit leather. It can also be
to make wine. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Delicious, large, coal-black berries with black juice - this
sounds like something a child would make up. But it's real. The heartwood
is almost black, the pale bark clay-smooth. Interesting that our two persime
mons have utterly opposite bark characteristics. The first time I encountered
black persimmon I thought I was seeing dead, sun-bleached wood. Inis
fruit seems to lack the astringent fake-ripe phase of common per simmon
AKA Texas persimmon.
89
TREES OR SHRUBS WITH LARGE FLESHY FRUITS (OVER 0.8" / CM) 4 Black persimmon 093 Diospyros texanum Ebenaceae (Persimmon family) QUICK CHECK: Small scrubby tree with very smooth light gray bask. or mall, entire, leathery leaves; fruit like a black herry tomato ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Small tree (sometimes fruiting al shruh size) In 40 (1) m) tall, after multi-trunked, scrubby and twisted, dense with stiff branches at broad angles Bark smooth and thin, light gray, flaking off in paper-thin layers, the wood ridged or "muscly" very Twigs red-brown to grayish with light lenticels, the new twigs finely hairy. Twigs are rougher and darker than older trunks-opposite the situation on most trees. Leaves alternate, persisting at least into early Nicher crowded at twig tips, mostly ascending, leathery, 0.7-2" (1.8-5 long. Blades entire, obovate or spoon shaned with blunt tips that are rounded or occasionally notched, narrowed at the base, the margins rolled Surface sparsely hairy and dark above, the veinlets slightly depressed; densely woolly and I ghter general the underside. Secondary veins are scarcely evident. Petioles extremely short. Flowers (spring in sarly ilim mer) male and female on separate trees, solitary or in small clusters. A calyx of 5 broad, thick lobez once through fruiting. Corolla urn-shaped, greenish white, soft-hairy, 1 cm long with 5 spreading lobes often cotor at the tip. Fruit spherical or slightly compressed, 0.7-1" (18-25 mm) across, green at first ripering sudde to black, pulpy and juicy, the surface covered with minute wool, subtended by a 5-6 lobed caly/. Seeds red-brown, semi-hard, 5-9 mm long, shaped like a lentil bulged on one side. HABITAT: Rocky, hilly, well-drained, sunny sites, especially on limestone-derived soils. Native. FOOD USE: Ripe fruit (late summer to early autumn) can be eaten off the tree or the pulp used in baking or for fruit leather. It can also be to make wine. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Delicious, large, coal-black berries with black juice - this sounds like something a child would make up. But it's real. The heartwood is almost black, the pale bark clay-smooth. Interesting that our two persime mons have utterly opposite bark characteristics. The first time I encountered black persimmon I thought I was seeing dead, sun-bleached wood. Inis fruit seems to lack the astringent fake-ripe phase of common per simmon AKA Texas persimmon. 89 