QUICK CHECK: Very large entire leaves, wider toward the tip; large, kidney-shaped
fruit small tree. forming colonies by suckering. Trunks with single, faint
ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Large m) tall shrub and or up to 10" (25 cm) in diameter. Bark with smooth silky-pubescent, or
bumps erect, 8-35' almost buds. (2.4-11 uniform Leaves 8-18" gray, (20-46 thin. Branches cm) long, few wider and toward twigs the large, tip, with entire margins. before the Numerous margin. Midvein second-
dark brown side) 45° to the midvein, curling forward and splitting just Petioles 2-3% of blade length,
protrudes prominently below. patch of dark rusty hairs on top. Flowers (mid spring) 1.5" (3.8 at first but
ary veins (10-15 per Ripped leaves have a potent, unpleasant odor. cm) wide with
slightly winged with a sepais dense and 6 petals (of 2 different sizes, the inner 3 much smaller), often slightly green curved or
3 hairy green-maroon dark maroon, the petals with deeply depressed veins. Fruit 2-8" (5-20 cm) long, Seeds
kidney-shaped; turning skin thin, green with black areas; flesh pale yellow, becoming very soft upon ripening.
numerous, flattened, oblong, about 0.8" (2 cm) long, dark brown.
HABITAT: Hardwood forests on rich soil, especially floodplains and valleys. Often with pecan, bitternut,
hackberry, sycamore, eim, ash, red mulberry. Most common at forest edges or where the overhead canopy
is sparse. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather ripe fruit from the tree or from the ground in late summer or early autumn, well before
the leaves fall. Smacking the trunk will often bring down a few ripe pawpaws (watch your head). The fruit is
notoriously hard to see, as it is the same color as the leaves. Pawpaws can be eaten fresh or used in many
desserts. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: The largest edible fruit native to North America. In good pawpaw groves the fruit can some-
times be gathered very easily. I prefer them soft but with the skin still green. The flavor and smell are strong
and disagreeable to some people-but it reminds me of a delicious cross between bananas and mangos.
Interestingly. a single flower can produce a cluster of pawpaws.
WARNING: A fairly large percentage of people experience nausea, sometimes severe, after eating pawpaws.
An even larger percentage of people experience diarrhea after eating them underripe.
RELATED EDIBLES? There are 6 additional species of pawpaw in North America, mostly confined to Florida
(although one species,
A. parviflora, is found as
far north as Virginia). All
of the others have much
smaller fruit. I have not
eater any of these other
pawpaws. nor have I
spoken to anyone who
nas so can't recom-
mend them as food.
QUICK CHECK: Very large entire leaves, wider toward the tip; large, kidney-shaped fruit small tree. forming colonies by suckering. Trunks with single, faint ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Large m) tall shrub and or up to 10" (25 cm) in diameter. Bark with smooth silky-pubescent, or bumps erect, 8-35' almost buds. (2.4-11 uniform Leaves 8-18" gray, (20-46 thin. Branches cm) long, few wider and toward twigs the large, tip, with entire margins. before the Numerous margin. Midvein second- dark brown side) 45° to the midvein, curling forward and splitting just Petioles 2-3% of blade length, protrudes prominently below. patch of dark rusty hairs on top. Flowers (mid spring) 1.5" (3.8 at first but ary veins (10-15 per Ripped leaves have a potent, unpleasant odor. cm) wide with slightly winged with a sepais dense and 6 petals (of 2 different sizes, the inner 3 much smaller), often slightly green curved or 3 hairy green-maroon dark maroon, the petals with deeply depressed veins. Fruit 2-8" (5-20 cm) long, Seeds kidney-shaped; turning skin thin, green with black areas; flesh pale yellow, becoming very soft upon ripening. numerous, flattened, oblong, about 0.8" (2 cm) long, dark brown. HABITAT: Hardwood forests on rich soil, especially floodplains and valleys. Often with pecan, bitternut, hackberry, sycamore, eim, ash, red mulberry. Most common at forest edges or where the overhead canopy is sparse. Native. FOOD USE: Gather ripe fruit from the tree or from the ground in late summer or early autumn, well before the leaves fall. Smacking the trunk will often bring down a few ripe pawpaws (watch your head). The fruit is notoriously hard to see, as it is the same color as the leaves. Pawpaws can be eaten fresh or used in many desserts. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: The largest edible fruit native to North America. In good pawpaw groves the fruit can some- times be gathered very easily. I prefer them soft but with the skin still green. The flavor and smell are strong and disagreeable to some people-but it reminds me of a delicious cross between bananas and mangos. Interestingly. a single flower can produce a cluster of pawpaws. WARNING: A fairly large percentage of people experience nausea, sometimes severe, after eating pawpaws. An even larger percentage of people experience diarrhea after eating them underripe. RELATED EDIBLES? There are 6 additional species of pawpaw in North America, mostly confined to Florida (although one species, A. parviflora, is found as far north as Virginia). All of the others have much smaller fruit. I have not eater any of these other pawpaws. nor have I spoken to anyone who nas so can't recom- mend them as food. 