6 Ogeechee lime
1
Nyssa ogeche
Cornaceae (Dogwood family)
fruit QUICK with CHECK: Swamp tree with alternate, entire, oblanceolate leaves and olliptic dull
a single elongated seed. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Small to medium-sized, often multiple-trunked tree to 60' (18
Trunks with enlarged, buttressed bases, the bark gray with shallow furrows, the m) tall
broken into many small blocks. Twigs thick and sparse, light brown, faintly hairy, smooth. ridges
Leaves alternate, clustered at twig tips, entire, 3-7" (8-18 cm) long and less than half as wide.
oblanceolate, the tips abruptly narrowed to a sharp point or sometimes blunt, the bases acute. The elliptic to
is downy on both sides but more so below. Midvein depressed above; secondary veins are about 45° surface to the
midvein, flat to raised and brownish; all veins protrude below. Petioles about 15% of blade length, downy,
usually downcurved, channeled faintly if at all. Flowers male and female on separate trees. Both !/ nds are
tiny, unshowy, and greenish-white. Male flowers lack petals, looking like little stamen bails on a drooping
stem; female flowers are short-stalked with petals and an obvious ovary. Fruit elliptic, about 1" (2.5 cm) long.
hanging on a hairy pedicel about the same length, the surface rippled, smooth and waxy, with a nipole-ike
tip, green at first becoming tawny blushing pink to red when ripe. Flesh is slightly juicy, pale to pinkish with
air pockets (it disperses by flotation), divided inside with papery wings, enclosing a single long, woody, ridged
seed almost as long as the fruit.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Water tupelo N. aquatica is a close relative of similar habitat and some range overlap,
but its leaves often have scattered large teeth and its smaller fruit ripens to blue-black.
HABITAT: Swamp forests, often in standing water. Native.
FOOD USE: The fruits are very sour and can be used in juice mixes, jams, jellies, or other situations where
this quality is desired. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This tree is usually easy to spot because its
leaves tend to be much larger than those of the trees around it
AKA ogeechee tupelo.
91
6 Ogeechee lime 1 Nyssa ogeche Cornaceae (Dogwood family) fruit QUICK with CHECK: Swamp tree with alternate, entire, oblanceolate leaves and olliptic dull a single elongated seed. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Small to medium-sized, often multiple-trunked tree to 60' (18 Trunks with enlarged, buttressed bases, the bark gray with shallow furrows, the m) tall broken into many small blocks. Twigs thick and sparse, light brown, faintly hairy, smooth. ridges Leaves alternate, clustered at twig tips, entire, 3-7" (8-18 cm) long and less than half as wide. oblanceolate, the tips abruptly narrowed to a sharp point or sometimes blunt, the bases acute. The elliptic to is downy on both sides but more so below. Midvein depressed above; secondary veins are about 45° surface to the midvein, flat to raised and brownish; all veins protrude below. Petioles about 15% of blade length, downy, usually downcurved, channeled faintly if at all. Flowers male and female on separate trees. Both !/ nds are tiny, unshowy, and greenish-white. Male flowers lack petals, looking like little stamen bails on a drooping stem; female flowers are short-stalked with petals and an obvious ovary. Fruit elliptic, about 1" (2.5 cm) long. hanging on a hairy pedicel about the same length, the surface rippled, smooth and waxy, with a nipole-ike tip, green at first becoming tawny blushing pink to red when ripe. Flesh is slightly juicy, pale to pinkish with air pockets (it disperses by flotation), divided inside with papery wings, enclosing a single long, woody, ridged seed almost as long as the fruit. CONFUSING PLANTS: Water tupelo N. aquatica is a close relative of similar habitat and some range overlap, but its leaves often have scattered large teeth and its smaller fruit ripens to blue-black. HABITAT: Swamp forests, often in standing water. Native. FOOD USE: The fruits are very sour and can be used in juice mixes, jams, jellies, or other situations where this quality is desired. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This tree is usually easy to spot because its leaves tend to be much larger than those of the trees around it AKA ogeechee tupelo. 91 