OR SHRUBS WITH LARGE FLESHY FRUITS (OVER 0.8" CM)
8 Apple
3
Malus domestica
Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK the stem CHECK: Large fruit 1.5-5" in diameter with pointed calyx on a depressor
attached in depressed base; leaves erratically toothed, alternate ID difficulty 1,
DESCRIPTION: and Trees to 50' (15 m) tall and 2' (60 cm) diameter with a single trunk.
branching and spreading in full sun, leaning in shade. Bark smooth at first ber widely
flaky peeling in short strips with age. Twigs finely hairy when young, lacking thorns; oming
terminal with buds hairy. Leaves alternate, roughly ovate, the base broad and the tip pointed, hair
depressed veins, soft-hairy below. Margins irregular, finely toothed, wavy and sometimes sparsely loosd above
ole about 40% of blade length. Flowers in small umbels directly from twigs, each on a pedicel about Peti-
cm), white to pink, 1-1.5" (2.5-4 across with 5 broad petals and numerous stamens. Fruit looks justille
an apple because it is one.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Hawthorns (genus Crataegus) and native crabapples (genus Malus). grow on sim ar
looking trees, but have thorns and smaller fruit.
HABITAT: roadsides, old home sites, pastures, abandoned fields, forest edges, young second-growth MOODS
Introduced.
FOOD USE: W.
apples can be used
in the same ways as
cultivated apples, out
you must be select ve
about the fruit. Some
trees have excellent
flavor.
COMMENTS: This
escape from cultiva-
tion is abundant in
many regions and is
one of our most useful
wild fruits; millions of
bushels are gathered
and used annually.
Some wild trees have
fabulous fruit.
Related edible:
Eurasian crabapples
genus Malus
2
9
These have gone feral, especially
around urban areas, in much of
our region. This is not a single
species, but an assortment of
several species and hybrids. A
crabapple is not just any small
apple-these are entirely separate species but they cra-
frequently hybridize with apples curasian of 5-20
do have flowers and fruits if umbers trom
bapples fruits structured like an apple but ranging hes lack
the 15-38 mm) in length. The biddle and
0 2-15" Eurasian crabapples are high if pectin mults
thorns excellent jelly, alone or mixed with othe: vinegar
make They can be pickled or used In oders
sauces, leather. or pie.
Fruit size and color are highly vai able
93
OR SHRUBS WITH LARGE FLESHY FRUITS (OVER 0.8" CM) 8 Apple 3 Malus domestica Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK the stem CHECK: Large fruit 1.5-5" in diameter with pointed calyx on a depressor attached in depressed base; leaves erratically toothed, alternate ID difficulty 1, DESCRIPTION: and Trees to 50' (15 m) tall and 2' (60 cm) diameter with a single trunk. branching and spreading in full sun, leaning in shade. Bark smooth at first ber widely flaky peeling in short strips with age. Twigs finely hairy when young, lacking thorns; oming terminal with buds hairy. Leaves alternate, roughly ovate, the base broad and the tip pointed, hair depressed veins, soft-hairy below. Margins irregular, finely toothed, wavy and sometimes sparsely loosd above ole about 40% of blade length. Flowers in small umbels directly from twigs, each on a pedicel about Peti- cm), white to pink, 1-1.5" (2.5-4 across with 5 broad petals and numerous stamens. Fruit looks justille an apple because it is one. CONFUSING PLANTS: Hawthorns (genus Crataegus) and native crabapples (genus Malus). grow on sim ar looking trees, but have thorns and smaller fruit. HABITAT: roadsides, old home sites, pastures, abandoned fields, forest edges, young second-growth MOODS Introduced. FOOD USE: W. apples can be used in the same ways as cultivated apples, out you must be select ve about the fruit. Some trees have excellent flavor. COMMENTS: This escape from cultiva- tion is abundant in many regions and is one of our most useful wild fruits; millions of bushels are gathered and used annually. Some wild trees have fabulous fruit. Related edible: Eurasian crabapples genus Malus 2 9 These have gone feral, especially around urban areas, in much of our region. This is not a single species, but an assortment of several species and hybrids. A crabapple is not just any small apple-these are entirely separate species but they cra- frequently hybridize with apples curasian of 5-20 do have flowers and fruits if umbers trom bapples fruits structured like an apple but ranging hes lack the 15-38 mm) in length. The biddle and 0 2-15" Eurasian crabapples are high if pectin mults thorns excellent jelly, alone or mixed with othe: vinegar make They can be pickled or used In oders sauces, leather. or pie. Fruit size and color are highly vai able 93 