TREES OR SHRUBS WITH LARGE FLESHY FRUITS (OVER)
7 Native crabapples
genus
Malus
(in
part)
Rosaceae
(Rose
family)
QUICK CHECK: Apple shaped truit 1-2" in diameter; green, hard, and sticky when
ripe. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Small trees up to 30' (9 m) tall and 16" (40 cm) in diameter, with a broad,
spreading crown and single trunk. Bark reddish brown to gray with small, peeling, scaly
to plates. ovate in outline. gray, Margins toothed, sometimes with lobes-especially on sprouts. Petioles 40-70% of apples. blade
Twigs often with rough thorns. Leaves alternate, 1.5-3" (4-8 long, lanceolate
length. Flowers (spring) 1-1.7" (25-43 mm) wide, with five blunt-tipped pink petals, similar to cultivated in
Fruit a hard green or yellow-green apple 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) wide, typically broader than long, borne singly or
small clusters, the skin usually splotched or speckled with black. The fruit is very aromatic with a sticky surface.
SPECIES: There are three similar native wild apples in our region, with ranges that barely overlap. Prairie
crabapple Malus ioensis is found in the lower Midwest mostly west of Lake Michigan; its leaves are downy
beneath. M. coronaria (sweet crabapple, a very misleading name) is found east of Lake Michigan and has
leaves that are mostly hairless underneath. Southern crabapple M. angustifolia has narrower leaves with less
prominent teeth; it is found through most of the South.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Hawthorns (genus Crataegus) are similar in appearance but tend to have denser
crowns with smoother thorns. Their fruit is much smaller and ripens to red. Eurasian crabapples usually have
smaller fruit with many per cluster, ripening to some combination of red, yellow, or orange. Feral apples are
larger and softer. None of these have the green and black mottled sticky skin.
HABITAT: Forest edges, young forests and thickets, old fields, river and stream valleys. Native.
FOOD USE: These ripen in mid to late autumn as or after the leaves fall and can be picked from the tree or
the ground. They can be simmered to make a sour, high-pectin juice to mix with milder fruits like elderberry
for making jelly. They can also be canned or made into an extremely sour sauce or fruit leather. Children might
enjoy nibbling them raw, as I used to. They remain hard for months at room temperature. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Native crabapples do not look, feel, smell, or
taste like feral apples or introduced Eurasian crabapples.
Occasional trees produce a bumper crop. Confusion is ram-
pant about which crabapples are native: At the time of this
writing most Inaturalist photos, and every photo on the Ohio
Department of Natural Resources web page for Malus coro-
naria, were of quite dissimilar non-native species.
Malus IDENSIS flowers, (inset) fruit.
92
Malus coronaria (top) leaf, (bottom) fruit.
TREES OR SHRUBS WITH LARGE FLESHY FRUITS (OVER) 7 Native crabapples genus Malus (in part) Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK CHECK: Apple shaped truit 1-2" in diameter; green, hard, and sticky when ripe. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Small trees up to 30' (9 m) tall and 16" (40 cm) in diameter, with a broad, spreading crown and single trunk. Bark reddish brown to gray with small, peeling, scaly to plates. ovate in outline. gray, Margins toothed, sometimes with lobes-especially on sprouts. Petioles 40-70% of apples. blade Twigs often with rough thorns. Leaves alternate, 1.5-3" (4-8 long, lanceolate length. Flowers (spring) 1-1.7" (25-43 mm) wide, with five blunt-tipped pink petals, similar to cultivated in Fruit a hard green or yellow-green apple 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) wide, typically broader than long, borne singly or small clusters, the skin usually splotched or speckled with black. The fruit is very aromatic with a sticky surface. SPECIES: There are three similar native wild apples in our region, with ranges that barely overlap. Prairie crabapple Malus ioensis is found in the lower Midwest mostly west of Lake Michigan; its leaves are downy beneath. M. coronaria (sweet crabapple, a very misleading name) is found east of Lake Michigan and has leaves that are mostly hairless underneath. Southern crabapple M. angustifolia has narrower leaves with less prominent teeth; it is found through most of the South. CONFUSING PLANTS: Hawthorns (genus Crataegus) are similar in appearance but tend to have denser crowns with smoother thorns. Their fruit is much smaller and ripens to red. Eurasian crabapples usually have smaller fruit with many per cluster, ripening to some combination of red, yellow, or orange. Feral apples are larger and softer. None of these have the green and black mottled sticky skin. HABITAT: Forest edges, young forests and thickets, old fields, river and stream valleys. Native. FOOD USE: These ripen in mid to late autumn as or after the leaves fall and can be picked from the tree or the ground. They can be simmered to make a sour, high-pectin juice to mix with milder fruits like elderberry for making jelly. They can also be canned or made into an extremely sour sauce or fruit leather. Children might enjoy nibbling them raw, as I used to. They remain hard for months at room temperature. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Native crabapples do not look, feel, smell, or taste like feral apples or introduced Eurasian crabapples. Occasional trees produce a bumper crop. Confusion is ram- pant about which crabapples are native: At the time of this writing most Inaturalist photos, and every photo on the Ohio Department of Natural Resources web page for Malus coro- naria, were of quite dissimilar non-native species. Malus IDENSIS flowers, (inset) fruit. 92 Malus coronaria (top) leaf, (bottom) fruit. 