OR SHRUBS WITH LARGE FLESHY FRUITS (OVER 0.8" CM)
CHICKASAW PLUM: P angustifolion
short, forming dense the
drained sunny lor ations and
hills, of the southern US The leaves
very small, narrow, and tutted The plum.
ripen to reddish in early summer
the pulp very juicy. In my opinion, this is md olur and
best one for canning whole
MEXICAN PLUM: P. mexir anais the larg-
est tree among our wild plums, not infre
quently 30' (9 m) tall with a trunk 8 (20
cm) in diameter, and occasionally much
larger. It is less likely to form thickets. The
fruit, dull yellow-orange to reddish and coated with
bloom, is small, sour, and less juicy than " other
Chickasaw plum.
but still makes good food when fully ripe in late
fall. AKA big tree plum.
Mexican plum.
Mexican plums fallen
BEACH PLUM: Prunus maritima is a strag-
gling shrub of infertile, sandy coastal areas.
The leaves and fruit are smaller than those
of other wild plums. The plums ripen in
late summer and are pleasantly sour and
astringent, ripening to bluish, yellowish,
or colors in between. Unfortunately two other species beach
sandcherry Prunus pumila (p. 162) and rugosa rose Rosa rugosa
(p. 86) are also frequently called "beach plum.
OR SHRUBS WITH LARGE FLESHY FRUITS (OVER 0.8" CM) CHICKASAW PLUM: P angustifolion short, forming dense the drained sunny lor ations and hills, of the southern US The leaves very small, narrow, and tutted The plum. ripen to reddish in early summer the pulp very juicy. In my opinion, this is md olur and best one for canning whole MEXICAN PLUM: P. mexir anais the larg- est tree among our wild plums, not infre quently 30' (9 m) tall with a trunk 8 (20 cm) in diameter, and occasionally much larger. It is less likely to form thickets. The fruit, dull yellow-orange to reddish and coated with bloom, is small, sour, and less juicy than " other Chickasaw plum. but still makes good food when fully ripe in late fall. AKA big tree plum. Mexican plum. Mexican plums fallen BEACH PLUM: Prunus maritima is a strag- gling shrub of infertile, sandy coastal areas. The leaves and fruit are smaller than those of other wild plums. The plums ripen in late summer and are pleasantly sour and astringent, ripening to bluish, yellowish, or colors in between. Unfortunately two other species beach sandcherry Prunus pumila (p. 162) and rugosa rose Rosa rugosa (p. 86) are also frequently called "beach plum. 