TREES OR SHRUBS WITH LARGE FLESHY
10 Wild plum
3
NG-305
Prunus
(in
part)
Rosaceae
(Rose
family)
genus Small trees or shrubs with toothed, alternate leaves 1. and smooth-skinned
truit with 2 single. large, hard, clam-shaped stone. ID difficulty
shrubs small trees 5-40' (1.5-12 m) tall and 1-12" (2.5-30 The trunks cm) in
DESCRIPTION: Large thickets or by root suckers but the stems are not clumped. Bark smooth
diameter. often and forming the crowns spread broadly with stiff and thorny branches. bark peels
are crooked on stems with prominent light lenticels; with age the lanceolate
Composite
sideways to acuminate tips. The upper surface is reticulated by
and dark brown for flakes young or scales. Leaves alternate, 2-5" (5-13 long, ovate to depressed
range,
with toothed margins and with pinkish phallic growths; surfaces variably hairy. Petioles about with 15% before of blade the
veinlets, often diseased spring) bisexual, in umbels of 2-5 from twigs and spurs, appearing or turning pink
length. Flowers (early (15-23 mm) across, symmetrical, with 5 round-tipped white petals (sometimes attached flower parts
when with age), ripe. slightly if at all depressed on the stem end, 0.6-1.6" (1.5-4 cm) in diameter, ripening to with yellow, coating
leaves, 0.6-0.9" and numerous protruding stamens. Fruit spherical to oblong with no calyx or pink,
reddish. bluish and becoming soft inside. Pedicel 50-100% of fruit length. The skin is smooth a
of bloom or and the fruit contains a single, large, hard, clam-shaped stone. In some regions plums are frequently
afflicted with diseases that ruin the fruit.
FOOD USE: Gather ripe fruit from the twigs by hand, or shake it onto a sheet or tarp. If one acts promptly,
good fruit can sometimes be picked up from the ground. Mash ripe fruit and strain to remove seeds and
skins: the puree can be used for excellent jam or fruit leather. Whole plums can be canned like peaches in a
light sugar syrup. You can split them in half, remove the pits, and dehydrate. For juice or jelly, crush very-ripe
piums and then let the juice strain through a cloth by gravity, or use a steam juicer. An excellent oil can be
pressed from the pits. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: In many areas wild plums are available in incredible quantities. All species produce edible fruit,
but the quality varies. Four of the best-known species are pictured below.
AMERICAN PLUM: P. americana is our most common and widespread species and may also
have the largest fruit. It often forms large thickets along streams and in old fields and fence-
rows. The plums ripen in late summer or
early autumn, ripening yellow-orange
to reddish, with a thick, astringent skin
and a sweet, juicy interior.
American plum.
TREES OR SHRUBS WITH LARGE FLESHY 10 Wild plum 3 NG-305 Prunus (in part) Rosaceae (Rose family) genus Small trees or shrubs with toothed, alternate leaves 1. and smooth-skinned truit with 2 single. large, hard, clam-shaped stone. ID difficulty shrubs small trees 5-40' (1.5-12 m) tall and 1-12" (2.5-30 The trunks cm) in DESCRIPTION: Large thickets or by root suckers but the stems are not clumped. Bark smooth diameter. often and forming the crowns spread broadly with stiff and thorny branches. bark peels are crooked on stems with prominent light lenticels; with age the lanceolate Composite sideways to acuminate tips. The upper surface is reticulated by and dark brown for flakes young or scales. Leaves alternate, 2-5" (5-13 long, ovate to depressed range, with toothed margins and with pinkish phallic growths; surfaces variably hairy. Petioles about with 15% before of blade the veinlets, often diseased spring) bisexual, in umbels of 2-5 from twigs and spurs, appearing or turning pink length. Flowers (early (15-23 mm) across, symmetrical, with 5 round-tipped white petals (sometimes attached flower parts when with age), ripe. slightly if at all depressed on the stem end, 0.6-1.6" (1.5-4 cm) in diameter, ripening to with yellow, coating leaves, 0.6-0.9" and numerous protruding stamens. Fruit spherical to oblong with no calyx or pink, reddish. bluish and becoming soft inside. Pedicel 50-100% of fruit length. The skin is smooth a of bloom or and the fruit contains a single, large, hard, clam-shaped stone. In some regions plums are frequently afflicted with diseases that ruin the fruit. FOOD USE: Gather ripe fruit from the twigs by hand, or shake it onto a sheet or tarp. If one acts promptly, good fruit can sometimes be picked up from the ground. Mash ripe fruit and strain to remove seeds and skins: the puree can be used for excellent jam or fruit leather. Whole plums can be canned like peaches in a light sugar syrup. You can split them in half, remove the pits, and dehydrate. For juice or jelly, crush very-ripe piums and then let the juice strain through a cloth by gravity, or use a steam juicer. An excellent oil can be pressed from the pits. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: In many areas wild plums are available in incredible quantities. All species produce edible fruit, but the quality varies. Four of the best-known species are pictured below. AMERICAN PLUM: P. americana is our most common and widespread species and may also have the largest fruit. It often forms large thickets along streams and in old fields and fence- rows. The plums ripen in late summer or early autumn, ripening yellow-orange to reddish, with a thick, astringent skin and a sweet, juicy interior. American plum. 