BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS
GROUP 7 BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS
(LESS THAN 0.8" / 2 CM)
except devil's walking stick, sassafras, individuals, and red bay, a
For all of the species in this is the group fruit. Because fruit size varies between shrubby
the primary with fruit edible near part the 2 cm threshold may belong in group 6 or 7. Some groups 10
plant occasionally grow to tree size might also key here (check fruits.
species and 11). The that key below includes a few commonly encountered inedible tree
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 7
The key is not your final answer!
Leaves compound.
Leaves once pinnately compound, stem not spiny, fruit orange, in a compact, flat-topped
1. Mountain-ash
or
cluster 3-7" (8-18 cm) wide.
Leaves 2-3 times compound, stem spiny, purple fruit in a loose panicle to 40" (100 cm).
2. Devil's walking stick
Leaves simple.
Fruit with a single seed.
Leaf margin toothed.
Fruit elliptic, in a flat-topped cluster, seed flat. Black haw (see group 11).
Seed and fruit roundish, not in a flat-tcpped cluster.
Fruit ripens in autumn with semi-hard, sticky flesh.
3. Hackberry
Fruit ripens from summer to autumn with soft, juicy flesh.
Fruit purpie-black, in racemes.
or
Fruit with ragged 5-lobed calyx at the base.
5. Black cherry
or
Fruit with no calyx at the base. Chokecherry (see group 11).
Fruit red, In umbels.
Fruit smaller than 8 mm; blades lanceolate, smooth above.
6. Pin cherry
or
Fruit larger than 12 inm; blades broadly elliptic, rough above.
7. Sweet cherry
Leaf margin not toothed.
Fruit spherical or nearly so.
Skin blue-black, pulp greenish and soft.
or
8. Red Bay
Skin brownish to orange, pulp brownish.
4. Sugarberry
Fruit elliptic to egg-shaped.
Fruit grayish and dryish with a flaky surface; silvery leaves.
9. Russian-olive
Fruit bright red with a smooth surface and juicy flesh.
Fruit dark blue-purple-black.
10. Cornelian-cherry
Fruit in a branched cluster, the red pedicel thickened at the tip.
11. Sassafras
Fruit on grayish pedicels about as long as the fruit, In umbels directly from the twig.
Pedicels/peduncles many times longetr than the fruit, which is single or in sessile
12. Woolly bumelia
clusters of 2-3, Black gum (not edible).
Fruit with multiple seeds.
Fruit with a 5-part calyx at the tip,
Ripe fruit dark purple, in racemes; seeds soft; tree not thorny.
(see Ripe group fruit red 6). to yellow, in umbels, seeds soft; tree not thorny. Eurasian crabapple
13. Serviceberry
or
Ripe fruit red, orange, or yellow, in umbels, seeds hard; tree thorny.
Fruit ripens late summer to fall.
Fruit ripens late spring to early summer.
Fruit with no calyx at the tip.
14. Hawthorn
15, Mayhaw
fruit Holly bright (various red, species, on pedicels berries less not than edible). the dlameter of the fruit, persisting into winter,
edible, Fruit purple-black, see pp. 660-661). on pedicels greater than the fruit diameter. Buckthorns (mostly not
96
BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS GROUP 7 BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS (LESS THAN 0.8" / 2 CM) except devil's walking stick, sassafras, individuals, and red bay, a For all of the species in this is the group fruit. Because fruit size varies between shrubby the primary with fruit edible near part the 2 cm threshold may belong in group 6 or 7. Some groups 10 plant occasionally grow to tree size might also key here (check fruits. species and 11). The that key below includes a few commonly encountered inedible tree TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 7 The key is not your final answer! Leaves compound. Leaves once pinnately compound, stem not spiny, fruit orange, in a compact, flat-topped 1. Mountain-ash or cluster 3-7" (8-18 cm) wide. Leaves 2-3 times compound, stem spiny, purple fruit in a loose panicle to 40" (100 cm). 2. Devil's walking stick Leaves simple. Fruit with a single seed. Leaf margin toothed. Fruit elliptic, in a flat-topped cluster, seed flat. Black haw (see group 11). Seed and fruit roundish, not in a flat-tcpped cluster. Fruit ripens in autumn with semi-hard, sticky flesh. 3. Hackberry Fruit ripens from summer to autumn with soft, juicy flesh. Fruit purpie-black, in racemes. or Fruit with ragged 5-lobed calyx at the base. 5. Black cherry or Fruit with no calyx at the base. Chokecherry (see group 11). Fruit red, In umbels. Fruit smaller than 8 mm; blades lanceolate, smooth above. 6. Pin cherry or Fruit larger than 12 inm; blades broadly elliptic, rough above. 7. Sweet cherry Leaf margin not toothed. Fruit spherical or nearly so. Skin blue-black, pulp greenish and soft. or 8. Red Bay Skin brownish to orange, pulp brownish. 4. Sugarberry Fruit elliptic to egg-shaped. Fruit grayish and dryish with a flaky surface; silvery leaves. 9. Russian-olive Fruit bright red with a smooth surface and juicy flesh. Fruit dark blue-purple-black. 10. Cornelian-cherry Fruit in a branched cluster, the red pedicel thickened at the tip. 11. Sassafras Fruit on grayish pedicels about as long as the fruit, In umbels directly from the twig. Pedicels/peduncles many times longetr than the fruit, which is single or in sessile 12. Woolly bumelia clusters of 2-3, Black gum (not edible). Fruit with multiple seeds. Fruit with a 5-part calyx at the tip, Ripe fruit dark purple, in racemes; seeds soft; tree not thorny. (see Ripe group fruit red 6). to yellow, in umbels, seeds soft; tree not thorny. Eurasian crabapple 13. Serviceberry or Ripe fruit red, orange, or yellow, in umbels, seeds hard; tree thorny. Fruit ripens late summer to fall. Fruit ripens late spring to early summer. Fruit with no calyx at the tip. 14. Hawthorn 15, Mayhaw fruit Holly bright (various red, species, on pedicels berries less not than edible). the dlameter of the fruit, persisting into winter, edible, Fruit purple-black, see pp. 660-661). on pedicels greater than the fruit diameter. Buckthorns (mostly not 96 