mm
0
1cm
BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS
1
Mountain-ash
1
genus Sorbus
Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK ID: Small trees with pinnately compound leaves and orange Fruit in larger
topped clusters. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Small trees 10-50' (3-15 m) tall, often with multiple trunks 1-16" (10
in diameter, but not spreading to form thickets. The crown is narrow and rounded. Bark thin
and smooth at first with large lenticels, brownish or silvery gray; on older trees breaking into
plates or strips and eventually peeling horizontally. Twigs dull green to brown, moderately
thick, with a bitter almond smell when broken. Leaves alternate, pinnately compound, with 11-19 sessile leaflets.
the rachis channeled. Leaflets narrowly lanceolate to oblong, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, with toothed margins
Surfaces are variably hairy. Midvein depressed; secondary veins numerous, depressed, straight, at angles
greater than 45°. Inflorescence a showy, rounded to flat-topped cluster 3-8" (8-20 across with dozens
of flowers. Flowers (early to mid summer) 5-12 mm across, with a 5-lobed calyx, 5 rounded white petals. and
numerous light stamens. Fruit roughly spherical, shaped like a miniature apple 5-8 mm in diameter with an
indented or crimped end bearing a 5-part calyx, ripening to orange and soft, containing multiple soft seeds
SPECIES: Showy mountain-ash S. decora and American mountain-ash S. americana are both native; European
mountain-ash S. aucuparia is introduced from Eurasia but has naturalized over a broad area. All of these spe-
cies are similar in appearance and food use.
HABITAT: Dry or moist sunny sites, often poor soil. Forest edges and openings, rocky ridges and hillsides
abandoned industrial sites, lakeshores, dunes, riverbanks, fencerows, shrub swamps. Native and introduced.
FOOD USE: Pick fruit after it fully ripens in autumn. Some sources
say that frosts sweeten and mellow the flavor; I have not observed this
despite testing it many times. The fruit can be used to make jams or
preserves, or crushed and dried for future use. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: These berries are easy to pick in enormous quantities
by grabbing whole clusters. The drawback is that their flavor is bitter
and, for the most part, terrible. A few people like preserves made
from this fruit. Without a generous dose of sugar or dilution by other
ingredients, practically nobody would eat them.
97
Fruit of Sorbus aucuparia.
mm 0 1cm BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS 1 Mountain-ash 1 genus Sorbus Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK ID: Small trees with pinnately compound leaves and orange Fruit in larger topped clusters. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Small trees 10-50' (3-15 m) tall, often with multiple trunks 1-16" (10 in diameter, but not spreading to form thickets. The crown is narrow and rounded. Bark thin and smooth at first with large lenticels, brownish or silvery gray; on older trees breaking into plates or strips and eventually peeling horizontally. Twigs dull green to brown, moderately thick, with a bitter almond smell when broken. Leaves alternate, pinnately compound, with 11-19 sessile leaflets. the rachis channeled. Leaflets narrowly lanceolate to oblong, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, with toothed margins Surfaces are variably hairy. Midvein depressed; secondary veins numerous, depressed, straight, at angles greater than 45°. Inflorescence a showy, rounded to flat-topped cluster 3-8" (8-20 across with dozens of flowers. Flowers (early to mid summer) 5-12 mm across, with a 5-lobed calyx, 5 rounded white petals. and numerous light stamens. Fruit roughly spherical, shaped like a miniature apple 5-8 mm in diameter with an indented or crimped end bearing a 5-part calyx, ripening to orange and soft, containing multiple soft seeds SPECIES: Showy mountain-ash S. decora and American mountain-ash S. americana are both native; European mountain-ash S. aucuparia is introduced from Eurasia but has naturalized over a broad area. All of these spe- cies are similar in appearance and food use. HABITAT: Dry or moist sunny sites, often poor soil. Forest edges and openings, rocky ridges and hillsides abandoned industrial sites, lakeshores, dunes, riverbanks, fencerows, shrub swamps. Native and introduced. FOOD USE: Pick fruit after it fully ripens in autumn. Some sources say that frosts sweeten and mellow the flavor; I have not observed this despite testing it many times. The fruit can be used to make jams or preserves, or crushed and dried for future use. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: These berries are easy to pick in enormous quantities by grabbing whole clusters. The drawback is that their flavor is bitter and, for the most part, terrible. A few people like preserves made from this fruit. Without a generous dose of sugar or dilution by other ingredients, practically nobody would eat them. 97 Fruit of Sorbus aucuparia. 