BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS
Devil's walking stick
2
Aralia spinosa + Araliaceae (Ginseng family)
thick twigs and prickly bark; leaves very large difficulty and multi- 1.
OUR compound K ID flowers knormons and VERY fruit in large clusters with numerous umbels. ID
Large shrub or small tree, 10-35 (3-11 m) tall and up to 6" (15 cm) with in
DESCRIPTION: often spreading by root suckers to form colonies. The crowns are open thick-
diameter smooth and with broad-based prickles. Twigs extremely
few anches. the thickest Bark in our region, gray prickly, with thick pith, orange lenticels, enormous U-shaped 2 or 3 times leaf pinnately scars
probably almost around the twig, and a very large terminal bud. Leaves alternate, and bulged
wrapping (60-150 fully cm) long including the thick petiole, 2-3 (60-90 cm) wide, the rachis spiny with a sharp and
compound, 2-5' Leaflets numerous, paired, sessile or nearly so, 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, flat, ovate flat above.
sometimes at junctures. acuminate tip. Surfaces are sparsely hairy, with spines on the midveins. Veins are nearly and equally
broad, composed of numerous umbels. Flowers (mid to late summer) white, 3-4 mm across, with 5 regular
Margins are finely toothed. Inflorescence a large, branching terminal cluster to 4 (1.2 m) long
parts. Fruit oblong, 3-4 mm, juicy, with 5 bulges, 5 seeds, and persistent styles protruding from the tip, ripen-
ing to purple-black in fall.
A peeled shoot and its leafy tip.
HABITAT: Young woods, forest edges, or disturbed
areas within older forests. Native.
FOOD USE: The shoots in spring can be eaten
cooked or raw while they are still tender, before any
prickles have become hard. They have an aromatic,
slightly fruity flavor and are best peeled. as the skin
tastes strong and unpleasant. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This is one of the most distinct woody
plants of our region. A close and nearly identical
relative, A. elata, is eaten in Japan and often grows
feral here. I am not aware of the berries of either
species being edible or toxic, but they are distasteful.
98
Spring growth
BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS Devil's walking stick 2 Aralia spinosa + Araliaceae (Ginseng family) thick twigs and prickly bark; leaves very large difficulty and multi- 1. OUR compound K ID flowers knormons and VERY fruit in large clusters with numerous umbels. ID Large shrub or small tree, 10-35 (3-11 m) tall and up to 6" (15 cm) with in DESCRIPTION: often spreading by root suckers to form colonies. The crowns are open thick- diameter smooth and with broad-based prickles. Twigs extremely few anches. the thickest Bark in our region, gray prickly, with thick pith, orange lenticels, enormous U-shaped 2 or 3 times leaf pinnately scars probably almost around the twig, and a very large terminal bud. Leaves alternate, and bulged wrapping (60-150 fully cm) long including the thick petiole, 2-3 (60-90 cm) wide, the rachis spiny with a sharp and compound, 2-5' Leaflets numerous, paired, sessile or nearly so, 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, flat, ovate flat above. sometimes at junctures. acuminate tip. Surfaces are sparsely hairy, with spines on the midveins. Veins are nearly and equally broad, composed of numerous umbels. Flowers (mid to late summer) white, 3-4 mm across, with 5 regular Margins are finely toothed. Inflorescence a large, branching terminal cluster to 4 (1.2 m) long parts. Fruit oblong, 3-4 mm, juicy, with 5 bulges, 5 seeds, and persistent styles protruding from the tip, ripen- ing to purple-black in fall. A peeled shoot and its leafy tip. HABITAT: Young woods, forest edges, or disturbed areas within older forests. Native. FOOD USE: The shoots in spring can be eaten cooked or raw while they are still tender, before any prickles have become hard. They have an aromatic, slightly fruity flavor and are best peeled. as the skin tastes strong and unpleasant. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This is one of the most distinct woody plants of our region. A close and nearly identical relative, A. elata, is eaten in Japan and often grows feral here. I am not aware of the berries of either species being edible or toxic, but they are distasteful. 98 Spring growth 