Celtis occidentalis
Ulmaceae (Elm family)
QUICK ID: Warty-barked tree with simple, alternate leaves and pea-sized spherical
ruit. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Medium to large tree to 90' (27 m) tall. Trunks dominant, single, straight,
with a moderately spreading crown. Bark with variably spaced corky bumps, ridges, or thick
beeling plates and a layered appearance, sometimes described as "Grand Canyon bark."
Bark between the ridges is smooth and gray. Twigs thin, reddish brown in winter, zigzag,
often clustered near branch tips. Buds 3-6 mm long and half as wide, brown, appressed to
the twigs. Leaves 2.5-6" (6.4-15 cm) long, ovate with blunt, asymmetrical bases and long-pointed or acuminate
tips, often with warty growths (nipple galls). The upper surface may be nearly hairless or have short, stiff hairs:
the underside has finer hairs along the major veins. Veins and veinlets are prominently depressed above. the
veinlets perpendicular to the secondary veins, forming a net-like pattern. Margins coarsely serrated except
near the base. Petiole hairy, 7-10% of blade length. Flowers (spring) unisexual, male and female separate on the
same tree, both tiny and unshowy; the male with 5 lobes.
hanging in tiny clusters; the female single with a split and
recurved pistil. Fruit spherical, smooth, 7-11 mm, with a
single large stone, ripening to orange-brown or purple-
brown in early autumn
and often persisting
through the winter.
HABITAT: Primarily
higher parts of flood-
plain forests, but also
well-drained upland
hardwood forests,
particularly on rich
sandy soil. Common
as a street tree in
some regions. Native.
(Continued on the next
page.)
Hackberry bark
close-up.
Hackberry nipple
galls often form on
the leaf underside.
Celtis occidentalis Ulmaceae (Elm family) QUICK ID: Warty-barked tree with simple, alternate leaves and pea-sized spherical ruit. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Medium to large tree to 90' (27 m) tall. Trunks dominant, single, straight, with a moderately spreading crown. Bark with variably spaced corky bumps, ridges, or thick beeling plates and a layered appearance, sometimes described as "Grand Canyon bark." Bark between the ridges is smooth and gray. Twigs thin, reddish brown in winter, zigzag, often clustered near branch tips. Buds 3-6 mm long and half as wide, brown, appressed to the twigs. Leaves 2.5-6" (6.4-15 cm) long, ovate with blunt, asymmetrical bases and long-pointed or acuminate tips, often with warty growths (nipple galls). The upper surface may be nearly hairless or have short, stiff hairs: the underside has finer hairs along the major veins. Veins and veinlets are prominently depressed above. the veinlets perpendicular to the secondary veins, forming a net-like pattern. Margins coarsely serrated except near the base. Petiole hairy, 7-10% of blade length. Flowers (spring) unisexual, male and female separate on the same tree, both tiny and unshowy; the male with 5 lobes. hanging in tiny clusters; the female single with a split and recurved pistil. Fruit spherical, smooth, 7-11 mm, with a single large stone, ripening to orange-brown or purple- brown in early autumn and often persisting through the winter. HABITAT: Primarily higher parts of flood- plain forests, but also well-drained upland hardwood forests, particularly on rich sandy soil. Common as a street tree in some regions. Native. (Continued on the next page.) Hackberry bark close-up. Hackberry nipple galls often form on the leaf underside. 