mm
0
1cm
BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS
5
Black cherry
2 LI NG-293
Prunus serotina
Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK ID difficulty ID: Dark 2. scaly bark on mature trees; smooth, purple blac
DESCRIPTION: to be short and Can become a large forest tree to 100' (30m) tall, but
lenticels when widely spreading. Bark smooth, shiny, and dark with in open areas tends
Twigs young; at maturity covered with thin, peeling, black many "burnt horizontal white
bitter-almond smooth, thin, green in summer turning to reddish-brown, the bark potato chips."
2-3.5" (5-9 cm) smell when scratched; terminal buds present, 4-6 mm long and with a strong
above; paler below long, lanceolate with a sharp, often acuminate tip. Surface dark 2/3 as wide. Leaves alternate
rated, the teeth and hairless except for clumps of dense, soft fuzz along the midvein. green, Margins shiny, are and hairless
glands gland-tipped and curved in toward the blade. Petioles 5% of blade length, finely ser
near the leaf base. Flowers (early spring to early summer) 0.5" (13 mm) wide, with usually white with 2 reddish
racemes base 4-8" (10-20 cm) long. Fruit is a dark cherry 6-11 mm in diameter, with a single hard 5 petals in
purple-black from late spring in the Deep South to early fall in the North.
is a ragged-edged, reddish, roughly 5-lobed calyx about 1/3 the width of the fruit. The cherries store riper At the to
CONFUSING PLANTS: Chokecherry leaves are broader, obovate, sharp-toothed, and not shiny above; the
fruit is more crowded on the raceme and lacks the calyx.
HABITAT: Full sun and well-drained soil, especially sand; hardwood forests, old fields, fence rows, oak and
pine barrens. The best trees for picking are typically in open areas, where the branches may spread close to
the ground. Native.
FOOD USE: Strip cherries from clusters; ripe ones will detach easily. They may be eaten raw, but more com-
monly are cooked. You can separate pulp from seeds in a food mill for jams and desserts. Dried pulp will turn
out thick and sticky like prunes. For juice, use a steam-juicer or simmer fruit and then strain through a jelly
cloth. Conservation 1.
WARNING: Do not crush and eat the seeds. They have a stronger flavor than those of chokecherry and can
find no ethnographic record of their use as food.
COMMENTS: Black cherries are remarkably variable in flavor from tree to tree and region to region. Some
are detestable, while others are delicious out of hand. This is a major food source for songbirds, bears, and
raccoons. The fruit can be collected in great quantity. This is the largest native cherry tree, and a very impor-
tant lumber source.
101
mm 0 1cm BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS 5 Black cherry 2 LI NG-293 Prunus serotina Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK ID difficulty ID: Dark 2. scaly bark on mature trees; smooth, purple blac DESCRIPTION: to be short and Can become a large forest tree to 100' (30m) tall, but lenticels when widely spreading. Bark smooth, shiny, and dark with in open areas tends Twigs young; at maturity covered with thin, peeling, black many "burnt horizontal white bitter-almond smooth, thin, green in summer turning to reddish-brown, the bark potato chips." 2-3.5" (5-9 cm) smell when scratched; terminal buds present, 4-6 mm long and with a strong above; paler below long, lanceolate with a sharp, often acuminate tip. Surface dark 2/3 as wide. Leaves alternate rated, the teeth and hairless except for clumps of dense, soft fuzz along the midvein. green, Margins shiny, are and hairless glands gland-tipped and curved in toward the blade. Petioles 5% of blade length, finely ser near the leaf base. Flowers (early spring to early summer) 0.5" (13 mm) wide, with usually white with 2 reddish racemes base 4-8" (10-20 cm) long. Fruit is a dark cherry 6-11 mm in diameter, with a single hard 5 petals in purple-black from late spring in the Deep South to early fall in the North. is a ragged-edged, reddish, roughly 5-lobed calyx about 1/3 the width of the fruit. The cherries store riper At the to CONFUSING PLANTS: Chokecherry leaves are broader, obovate, sharp-toothed, and not shiny above; the fruit is more crowded on the raceme and lacks the calyx. HABITAT: Full sun and well-drained soil, especially sand; hardwood forests, old fields, fence rows, oak and pine barrens. The best trees for picking are typically in open areas, where the branches may spread close to the ground. Native. FOOD USE: Strip cherries from clusters; ripe ones will detach easily. They may be eaten raw, but more com- monly are cooked. You can separate pulp from seeds in a food mill for jams and desserts. Dried pulp will turn out thick and sticky like prunes. For juice, use a steam-juicer or simmer fruit and then strain through a jelly cloth. Conservation 1. WARNING: Do not crush and eat the seeds. They have a stronger flavor than those of chokecherry and can find no ethnographic record of their use as food. COMMENTS: Black cherries are remarkably variable in flavor from tree to tree and region to region. Some are detestable, while others are delicious out of hand. This is a major food source for songbirds, bears, and raccoons. The fruit can be collected in great quantity. This is the largest native cherry tree, and a very impor- tant lumber source. 101 