BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY
FOOD the 3 Hackberry USE: is sweet Gather from fruit early (continued) from fall the onward. branches, Mash or fruit by whole knocking can fruits also them (pulverizing be boiled down and onto the summer. then seedshells) a sheet strained Conservation or tarp. to and make They then "hackberry 1. are eat ripe as-is, if
make COMMENTS: or milk." mix pulp a a with wholesome rich other filling Hackberry There nuts drink and or is filling archaeological dried or is soup a food, berries. dry, base. but sweet there Mashed The evidence fruit, cambium is no like of practical a humans date, can be way with eating eaten to a thin-shelled remove in hackberries early the thin oily for seedshell. more seed. than Combined, Just 500,000 learn the years. to two like
RELATED the odd texture. EDIBLE: Dwarf hackberry Celtis tenuifolia is a large shrub
or small tree with fruit that can be eaten in the same ways.
Related edible:
4
Sugarberry
Celtis laevigata
2
/
3
NG-123
This tree is similar to hackberry but is on average a slightly smaller tree with a more
southerly distribution. The leaves are entire or have a few scattered teeth, the bark is
smoother with fewer warty projections, and the fruit averages slightly smaller. Sugarberry
can DE used similarly for food. The seeds are a bit harder and the fruit tastes more "fruity."
100
BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FOOD the 3 Hackberry USE: is sweet Gather from fruit early (continued) from fall the onward. branches, Mash or fruit by whole knocking can fruits also them (pulverizing be boiled down and onto the summer. then seedshells) a sheet strained Conservation or tarp. to and make They then "hackberry 1. are eat ripe as-is, if make COMMENTS: or milk." mix pulp a a with wholesome rich other filling Hackberry There nuts drink and or is filling archaeological dried or is soup a food, berries. dry, base. but sweet there Mashed The evidence fruit, cambium is no like of practical a humans date, can be way with eating eaten to a thin-shelled remove in hackberries early the thin oily for seedshell. more seed. than Combined, Just 500,000 learn the years. to two like RELATED the odd texture. EDIBLE: Dwarf hackberry Celtis tenuifolia is a large shrub or small tree with fruit that can be eaten in the same ways. Related edible: 4 Sugarberry Celtis laevigata 2 / 3 NG-123 This tree is similar to hackberry but is on average a slightly smaller tree with a more southerly distribution. The leaves are entire or have a few scattered teeth, the bark is smoother with fewer warty projections, and the fruit averages slightly smaller. Sugarberry can DE used similarly for food. The seeds are a bit harder and the fruit tastes more "fruity." 100 