mm
0
1cm
BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS
7
Sweet cherry
3
Prunus avium
Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK ID: Tree with alternate, simple, oblong, toothed, pointed leaves. hark dark
shiny, and peeling horizontally; fruit a small red cherry ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Small to medium-sized tree to 60' (18 m) tall and 24" (60 cm) thick
single or few erect to leaning trunks, the crown narrow to spreading Bark grayish with red,
smooth, and shiny with large lenticels on young trees; on older trunks darkening, the len-
ticels stretching into large horizontal cracks and the bark often peeling in horizontal strips. Twigs stout
smooth with egg-shaped buds clustered at the tip. Leaves alternate, appearing tufted or clumped and
twig tips, oblong to obovate, 3-6" (8-15 cm) long, broad at the base and abruptly narrowed to an acuminate on some
tip. Blades are nearly hairless above but distinctly hairy on the lower surface. Secondary veins 8-10 per side,
about 45° to the midvein, arching gently toward the tip and splitting up just before reaching the margin Veins
and veinlets are depressed above, giving the blade a rougher appearance than our native tree cherries. Mar-
gin double-toothed, the teeth large, narrow, and sharp, the tips not curled in toward the blade. Petioles 20-50%
of blade length, with 2-5 large red glands just below the leaf base. Inflorescence an umbel of 3-8, the pedicels
1" (2.5 cm) long. Flowers (spring) 1-1.4" (2.5-3.5 cm) across, with 5 broad, blunt, white petals and numerous
stamens. Fruit a dark red cherry 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) in diameter, with smooth skin and a single, roundish,
hard stone, hanging on a stem 2-3 times the diameter of the fruit.
HABITAT: Forest edges, disturbed woodlots, fence lines, roadsides-most often in rich, well-drained soil,
Introduced and sporadic in occurrence, most common in hilly farm country and urban areas.
FOOD USE: The cherries of feral trees are smaller than those of our domestic cultivars but are similar and
delicious and can be used in all the same ways.
COMMENTS: This is one non-
native tree I don't mind encoun-
tering. Birds usually pick them
clean, but occasionally I get a
few mouthfuls. AKA mazzard.
RELATED EDIBLE: Sour cherry
Prunus cerasus is also sometimes
found escaped from cultivation.
It is juicier and more sour but
makes delicious juice, pie, jam,
and leather.
Sour cherry fruit.
103
mm 0 1cm BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS 7 Sweet cherry 3 Prunus avium Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK ID: Tree with alternate, simple, oblong, toothed, pointed leaves. hark dark shiny, and peeling horizontally; fruit a small red cherry ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Small to medium-sized tree to 60' (18 m) tall and 24" (60 cm) thick single or few erect to leaning trunks, the crown narrow to spreading Bark grayish with red, smooth, and shiny with large lenticels on young trees; on older trunks darkening, the len- ticels stretching into large horizontal cracks and the bark often peeling in horizontal strips. Twigs stout smooth with egg-shaped buds clustered at the tip. Leaves alternate, appearing tufted or clumped and twig tips, oblong to obovate, 3-6" (8-15 cm) long, broad at the base and abruptly narrowed to an acuminate on some tip. Blades are nearly hairless above but distinctly hairy on the lower surface. Secondary veins 8-10 per side, about 45° to the midvein, arching gently toward the tip and splitting up just before reaching the margin Veins and veinlets are depressed above, giving the blade a rougher appearance than our native tree cherries. Mar- gin double-toothed, the teeth large, narrow, and sharp, the tips not curled in toward the blade. Petioles 20-50% of blade length, with 2-5 large red glands just below the leaf base. Inflorescence an umbel of 3-8, the pedicels 1" (2.5 cm) long. Flowers (spring) 1-1.4" (2.5-3.5 cm) across, with 5 broad, blunt, white petals and numerous stamens. Fruit a dark red cherry 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) in diameter, with smooth skin and a single, roundish, hard stone, hanging on a stem 2-3 times the diameter of the fruit. HABITAT: Forest edges, disturbed woodlots, fence lines, roadsides-most often in rich, well-drained soil, Introduced and sporadic in occurrence, most common in hilly farm country and urban areas. FOOD USE: The cherries of feral trees are smaller than those of our domestic cultivars but are similar and delicious and can be used in all the same ways. COMMENTS: This is one non- native tree I don't mind encoun- tering. Birds usually pick them clean, but occasionally I get a few mouthfuls. AKA mazzard. RELATED EDIBLE: Sour cherry Prunus cerasus is also sometimes found escaped from cultivation. It is juicier and more sour but makes delicious juice, pie, jam, and leather. Sour cherry fruit. 103 