BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS
2
FH-221
6 Pin cherry
(Rose
Family)
Prunus pensylvanica
Rosaceae
cherries borne on long stems in small umbels. ID difficulty 60' 1.
DESCRIPTION: QUICK ID Tiny red Large shrub to small tree, forming and narrow clones even by root in the suckers, open. Bark to smooth (18 when m)
tall and 12" (30 cm) in diameter, the crown numerous tall large, horizontal, brown lenticels shiny, red-
and dark black reddish on older metallic-shiny trees, often with peeling in horizontal strips. almond-scented Twigs very thin, when scratched.
Buds
2-3
mm,
young: plump. dish to often brown. clustered usually hairless at the tip. with Leaves a thin alternate, exfoliating 1.5-4" layer, (4-10 shiny cm), and light hairless green, above; very thin, the underside ovate to lanceolate, sparsely flat.
the base blunt and the tip pointed to acuminate. and Surface secondary veins slightly depressed above; about veinlets 10% of
hairy. especially serrated along the with main forward-pointing, veins. Midvein irregularly sized, gland-tipped 6-11 teeth. mm Petioles across with 5 white
blade length, with glands near the leaf stub. Fruit thin pedicels about 0.8" (2 cm) long, inside.
Margins finely base. Flowers (early spring) bisexual, spherical, 5-8 mm in
diameter. petals in umbels ripening of to 3-7 bright from red a short and slightly translucent on in mid to late summer, with a single hard stone
tree of dry, sunny sites. especially with poor rocky or sandy soils: forest razed edges, building rocky
HABITAT: slopes. pine Pioneer barrens, riverbanks. Thrives after fires or logging, or on old mine sites, gravel pits,
sites. abandoned farmland, and highway shoulders. Native.
FOOD USE: Ripe fruit is juicy and detaches easily from stems. It can be strained or juiced to make superb jam
or jelly. Cherries can also be eaten fresh from the tree. Conservation 1.
WARNING: Do not crush and eat
the seeds. They have a potent bitter
flavor and seem far more toxic than
chokecherry or black cherry pits.
COMMENTS: For most palates pin
cherries are usually too sour to snack
on, but occasional trees have milder
fruit. They make one of my favorite
jams. Pin cherry seeds can remain
viable in the soil for at least 50 years,
waiting for a disturbance to stimulate
germination. In fire-prone boreal for-
ests this seed bank strategy is very
effective. AKA fire cherry.
102
BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS 2 FH-221 6 Pin cherry (Rose Family) Prunus pensylvanica Rosaceae cherries borne on long stems in small umbels. ID difficulty 60' 1. DESCRIPTION: QUICK ID Tiny red Large shrub to small tree, forming and narrow clones even by root in the suckers, open. Bark to smooth (18 when m) tall and 12" (30 cm) in diameter, the crown numerous tall large, horizontal, brown lenticels shiny, red- and dark black reddish on older metallic-shiny trees, often with peeling in horizontal strips. almond-scented Twigs very thin, when scratched. Buds 2-3 mm, young: plump. dish to often brown. clustered usually hairless at the tip. with Leaves a thin alternate, exfoliating 1.5-4" layer, (4-10 shiny cm), and light hairless green, above; very thin, the underside ovate to lanceolate, sparsely flat. the base blunt and the tip pointed to acuminate. and Surface secondary veins slightly depressed above; about veinlets 10% of hairy. especially serrated along the with main forward-pointing, veins. Midvein irregularly sized, gland-tipped 6-11 teeth. mm Petioles across with 5 white blade length, with glands near the leaf stub. Fruit thin pedicels about 0.8" (2 cm) long, inside. Margins finely base. Flowers (early spring) bisexual, spherical, 5-8 mm in diameter. petals in umbels ripening of to 3-7 bright from red a short and slightly translucent on in mid to late summer, with a single hard stone tree of dry, sunny sites. especially with poor rocky or sandy soils: forest razed edges, building rocky HABITAT: slopes. pine Pioneer barrens, riverbanks. Thrives after fires or logging, or on old mine sites, gravel pits, sites. abandoned farmland, and highway shoulders. Native. FOOD USE: Ripe fruit is juicy and detaches easily from stems. It can be strained or juiced to make superb jam or jelly. Cherries can also be eaten fresh from the tree. Conservation 1. WARNING: Do not crush and eat the seeds. They have a potent bitter flavor and seem far more toxic than chokecherry or black cherry pits. COMMENTS: For most palates pin cherries are usually too sour to snack on, but occasional trees have milder fruit. They make one of my favorite jams. Pin cherry seeds can remain viable in the soil for at least 50 years, waiting for a disturbance to stimulate germination. In fire-prone boreal for- ests this seed bank strategy is very effective. AKA fire cherry. 102 