BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY
8 Red bay & swamp P. bay
Lauraceae
(Laurel
family)
Persea ID: Small borbonia tree with large, & flat, difficulty palustris entire evergreen 2. leaves and pea-sized spherical with
fruit QUICK with a large roundish Large shrubs seed. or ID small to medium-sized with vertical trees fissures 10-50' revealing (3-15 m) red-brown and tall finely
woolly, beneath, with the terminal ridges close together, buds 0.2-0.3" 2-6" (5-15 (5-8 mm) cm) long, long. Leaves but the at the proximal base, ones blunt-pointed often miniature. or sometimes Blades are rounded flat flat, above stiff or
DESCRIPTION: a narrow crown of stout becoming branches. thicker Bark on old thin trees. Twigs thick evergreen, and sparse, aromatic, dark clustered
at branch tips. broadly to narrowly elliptic, acute is shiny and hairless above. Midvein midvein, usually
and notched leathery, at the entire, tip, sometimes where it is curved raised. Secondary to the side. veins The surface 5-6 per side above. at a Petioles 50-75° 10% angle of to blade the length, dark of and
unbranched, except near the the base, ends curving toward the tip; channeled. they are nearly Inflorescence flat short. widely branching (summer) 3-5 clusters mm across, 3-12
and CONFUSING whitish thin from single densely also green leaf or to woolly, has in axils pale flesh small aromatic SPECIES: of pink round around the clusters or new leaves, yellow, in 0 Sweet cross year's from large, but cup-like leaf section, bay growth, spherical, the axils, magnolia flowers with not the spherical, blackish. pedicels 3 are ovate the Magnolia much sweet pea-sized 8-13 sepals about larger. virginiana bay mm, and 1" seed with (2.5 2-3" 3 smaller. shares with cm) smooth (5-8 long. a the cm) purplish hard-to-see black habitat Flowers across, skin kernel. and and (later petals much the wrinkling) fruit inside. of its is distribution a Fruits cone and with very few,
seeds.
When
these
parts
are
absent
magnolia bright red can be told apart by the silver-hairy underside of
its leaf and the much larger terminal bud about 2 cm long.
HABITAT: Low, moist, sandy, open woods, especially where
acidic; swamp and pond margins. Native.
FOOD USE: Leaves make an excellent seasoning like bay or
avocado leaf and can be collected at any season and used
fresh or dried. Powder the young leaves and mix them with
sassafras for a gumbo filé par excellence. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Green flesh. Dark skin. Single seed. This is in
the same genus as avocado, but there isn't much flesh to the
fruit. Many taxonomists divide this into two species. Red bay
P. borbonia is somewhat larger and grows on slightly richer
soil. Its twigs and leaf undersides are hairless (the latter even
glaucous). Swamp bay P. palustris is a smaller tree or shrub
char acteristic of acidic low-
lands in pine barrens. It is dif-
ferentiated by dense hairs on
the twigs, petioles, and lower
leaf surfaces. In my limited
experience swamp bay seems
to have the stronger flavor and
more mucilaginous leaf.
104
BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY 8 Red bay & swamp P. bay Lauraceae (Laurel family) Persea ID: Small borbonia tree with large, & flat, difficulty palustris entire evergreen 2. leaves and pea-sized spherical with fruit QUICK with a large roundish Large shrubs seed. or ID small to medium-sized with vertical trees fissures 10-50' revealing (3-15 m) red-brown and tall finely woolly, beneath, with the terminal ridges close together, buds 0.2-0.3" 2-6" (5-15 (5-8 mm) cm) long, long. Leaves but the at the proximal base, ones blunt-pointed often miniature. or sometimes Blades are rounded flat flat, above stiff or DESCRIPTION: a narrow crown of stout becoming branches. thicker Bark on old thin trees. Twigs thick evergreen, and sparse, aromatic, dark clustered at branch tips. broadly to narrowly elliptic, acute is shiny and hairless above. Midvein midvein, usually and notched leathery, at the entire, tip, sometimes where it is curved raised. Secondary to the side. veins The surface 5-6 per side above. at a Petioles 50-75° 10% angle of to blade the length, dark of and unbranched, except near the the base, ends curving toward the tip; channeled. they are nearly Inflorescence flat short. widely branching (summer) 3-5 clusters mm across, 3-12 and CONFUSING whitish thin from single densely also green leaf or to woolly, has in axils pale flesh small aromatic SPECIES: of pink round around the clusters or new leaves, yellow, in 0 Sweet cross year's from large, but cup-like leaf section, bay growth, spherical, the axils, magnolia flowers with not the spherical, blackish. pedicels 3 are ovate the Magnolia much sweet pea-sized 8-13 sepals about larger. virginiana bay mm, and 1" seed with (2.5 2-3" 3 smaller. shares with cm) smooth (5-8 long. a the cm) purplish hard-to-see black habitat Flowers across, skin kernel. and and (later petals much the wrinkling) fruit inside. of its is distribution a Fruits cone and with very few, seeds. When these parts are absent magnolia bright red can be told apart by the silver-hairy underside of its leaf and the much larger terminal bud about 2 cm long. HABITAT: Low, moist, sandy, open woods, especially where acidic; swamp and pond margins. Native. FOOD USE: Leaves make an excellent seasoning like bay or avocado leaf and can be collected at any season and used fresh or dried. Powder the young leaves and mix them with sassafras for a gumbo filé par excellence. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Green flesh. Dark skin. Single seed. This is in the same genus as avocado, but there isn't much flesh to the fruit. Many taxonomists divide this into two species. Red bay P. borbonia is somewhat larger and grows on slightly richer soil. Its twigs and leaf undersides are hairless (the latter even glaucous). Swamp bay P. palustris is a smaller tree or shrub char acteristic of acidic low- lands in pine barrens. It is dif- ferentiated by dense hairs on the twigs, petioles, and lower leaf surfaces. In my limited experience swamp bay seems to have the stronger flavor and more mucilaginous leaf. 104 