mm
0
1cm
BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS
9 Russian-olive
1
NG-326
Elaeagnus angustifolia family Elaeagnaceae
fruit. QUICK ID ID: difficulty Low, bushy 1. tree with narrow, silvery leaves and alive shaped
DESCRIPTION: low, bushy Medium-sized tree to 40' (12 m) tall, often leaning
thin peeling crown and strongly ascending young branches. Bark brown or crooked with a
covered with strips soft on older trunks, smooth and gray on young branches. covered with
long, narrowly silvery scales. Leaves alternate, small, mostly drooping, Twigs densely
above, pale elliptic or oblanceolate, often folded or curled upward. Surface 1.5 3 (4.8cm)
few teeth). beneath from a dense layer of silvery-white scales. Margins entire gray-green
Range exganding
10-15% a of blade Veins flat above and mostly obscure; secondary veins protrude (rarely slightly with below.
like with length. Flowers (late spring) single on short pedicels from leaf axils, Petioles 19%
olive-shaped, 4 triangular lobes, each with a ridge in the center, yellow inside and silver-gray about cm
11-13 mm long, hanging on a silvery pedicel about 1/3 the length of the fruit, outside often Fruit other
twig sections that drop their leaves and thus resemble a raceme. The surface is gray-green, Nded or
scales, blushing faintly yellow or reddish upon ripening in fall, the flesh dryish and powdery-pulpy covered Fach in berry 50° ,
contains a single elliptic leathery seed pointed at both ends.
HABITAT: Dry soil in full sun. Tolerates cold, heat, and drought. A common escape around urban areas and
in shelterbelts and stream bottoms of the Great Plains. Introduced. I
FOOD USE: Gather ripe fruit by hand. Nibble raw, or boil and then strain to separate pulp from seeds for fr ut
leather, baked goods, and spreads.
COMMENTS: Russian-olive is a unique fruit poorly suited for jams and jellies. It is often dry and astringent
but has a sweet overtone,
like a floury mixture of dates
and chokecherries. The fla-
vor is highly variable, 30
taste around for good trees.
Seeds are tough but the ker-
nel inside has good flavor
Russian-olive is not related to
olives, but is so named for the
resemblance of its elongated
green fruit. This tree is related
to autumberry (pi 139) and
silverberry (p. 155)
105
mm 0 1cm BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS 9 Russian-olive 1 NG-326 Elaeagnus angustifolia family Elaeagnaceae fruit. QUICK ID ID: difficulty Low, bushy 1. tree with narrow, silvery leaves and alive shaped DESCRIPTION: low, bushy Medium-sized tree to 40' (12 m) tall, often leaning thin peeling crown and strongly ascending young branches. Bark brown or crooked with a covered with strips soft on older trunks, smooth and gray on young branches. covered with long, narrowly silvery scales. Leaves alternate, small, mostly drooping, Twigs densely above, pale elliptic or oblanceolate, often folded or curled upward. Surface 1.5 3 (4.8cm) few teeth). beneath from a dense layer of silvery-white scales. Margins entire gray-green Range exganding 10-15% a of blade Veins flat above and mostly obscure; secondary veins protrude (rarely slightly with below. like with length. Flowers (late spring) single on short pedicels from leaf axils, Petioles 19% olive-shaped, 4 triangular lobes, each with a ridge in the center, yellow inside and silver-gray about cm 11-13 mm long, hanging on a silvery pedicel about 1/3 the length of the fruit, outside often Fruit other twig sections that drop their leaves and thus resemble a raceme. The surface is gray-green, Nded or scales, blushing faintly yellow or reddish upon ripening in fall, the flesh dryish and powdery-pulpy covered Fach in berry 50° , contains a single elliptic leathery seed pointed at both ends. HABITAT: Dry soil in full sun. Tolerates cold, heat, and drought. A common escape around urban areas and in shelterbelts and stream bottoms of the Great Plains. Introduced. I FOOD USE: Gather ripe fruit by hand. Nibble raw, or boil and then strain to separate pulp from seeds for fr ut leather, baked goods, and spreads. COMMENTS: Russian-olive is a unique fruit poorly suited for jams and jellies. It is often dry and astringent but has a sweet overtone, like a floury mixture of dates and chokecherries. The fla- vor is highly variable, 30 taste around for good trees. Seeds are tough but the ker- nel inside has good flavor Russian-olive is not related to olives, but is so named for the resemblance of its elongated green fruit. This tree is related to autumberry (pi 139) and silverberry (p. 155) 105 