0
BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS
11 Sassafras
2
[_]
IWE-328
Sassafras albidum
Lauraceae (Laurel family)
QUICK ID: Twigs green and lemony-aromatic; leaves toothless, ovate or lobed.
ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Medium-sized tree suckering to form clones, the crown narrow and the
trunk often crooked. All above-ground parts of the tree have a strong, pleasant, lemony
aroma. Root bark is rusty-brown with a root beer scent. Bark dark gray and deeply furrowed
on mature trees. Branches of saplings are sometimes whorled. Twigs bright green and smooth, aromatic when
scratched. Terminal buds are large, green, finely and densely pubescent. Leaves alternate, concentrated
(almost tufted) near branch tips, 3-6" (8-15 cm) long, tapered at the base, blunt at the tip, usually hairless
above but finely pubescent below, with a pair of prominent secondary veins near but not at the base The blades
come in three shapes: ovate and unlobed (most common on mature trees), mitten-shaped, or 3-lobed (most
common on young trees in full sun). Young spring leaves are finely downy. Petioles 10-30% of blade length
Shoots have whitish bloom and elongated purple spots. Inflorescence loose racemes of 8-14, with multiple
racemes from the same bud, the stems with very soft hairs. Flowers in spring, male and female on different
trees, 1 cm wide, with 6 narrow, spreading, light yellowish sepals. Fruit (early
fall) an oblong purple drupe about 1 cm long, held upright on a distinct red stalk
that enlarges to form a cup-like, 6-lobed base. The seed is single and smooth.
HABITAT: Young or disturbed woods; most prevalent on well-drained sand,
gravel, or other poor soil. Common invader of old fields, pastures, and roadsides.
Native.
FOOD USE: Gather young leaves just after emerging; they can be used in salad
or soup, or dried and powdered to make gumbo filé. Dig up roots (easiest on small
saplings), wash, and boil to make tea. (With larger roots, just use the bark.) Dry
bark or roots for use later. Roots can be boiled multiple times. The liquid can be
drunk sweetened or not, or brewed into root beer. Conservation 2, 1.
COMMENTS: This plant produces two of the most potent and distinct flavors
of any in North America; the flavor of the root is completely different from
that of the leaves, flowers, and twigs. Sassafras is the primary root that flavors
traditional "root beer," which is now rarely sold. Food or drink containing sas-
safras root was banned (sort of, but not explicitly) due to research concluding in
that of its components, safrole, caused cancer in rats when fed to them
one quantities. However, safrole is dissipated by drying and destroyed Gumbo by
enormous and so may not even be present in traditional sassafras drinks. no safrole.
filé boiling is still commercially made from sassafras leaves-which contain
107
0 BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS 11 Sassafras 2 [_] IWE-328 Sassafras albidum Lauraceae (Laurel family) QUICK ID: Twigs green and lemony-aromatic; leaves toothless, ovate or lobed. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Medium-sized tree suckering to form clones, the crown narrow and the trunk often crooked. All above-ground parts of the tree have a strong, pleasant, lemony aroma. Root bark is rusty-brown with a root beer scent. Bark dark gray and deeply furrowed on mature trees. Branches of saplings are sometimes whorled. Twigs bright green and smooth, aromatic when scratched. Terminal buds are large, green, finely and densely pubescent. Leaves alternate, concentrated (almost tufted) near branch tips, 3-6" (8-15 cm) long, tapered at the base, blunt at the tip, usually hairless above but finely pubescent below, with a pair of prominent secondary veins near but not at the base The blades come in three shapes: ovate and unlobed (most common on mature trees), mitten-shaped, or 3-lobed (most common on young trees in full sun). Young spring leaves are finely downy. Petioles 10-30% of blade length Shoots have whitish bloom and elongated purple spots. Inflorescence loose racemes of 8-14, with multiple racemes from the same bud, the stems with very soft hairs. Flowers in spring, male and female on different trees, 1 cm wide, with 6 narrow, spreading, light yellowish sepals. Fruit (early fall) an oblong purple drupe about 1 cm long, held upright on a distinct red stalk that enlarges to form a cup-like, 6-lobed base. The seed is single and smooth. HABITAT: Young or disturbed woods; most prevalent on well-drained sand, gravel, or other poor soil. Common invader of old fields, pastures, and roadsides. Native. FOOD USE: Gather young leaves just after emerging; they can be used in salad or soup, or dried and powdered to make gumbo filé. Dig up roots (easiest on small saplings), wash, and boil to make tea. (With larger roots, just use the bark.) Dry bark or roots for use later. Roots can be boiled multiple times. The liquid can be drunk sweetened or not, or brewed into root beer. Conservation 2, 1. COMMENTS: This plant produces two of the most potent and distinct flavors of any in North America; the flavor of the root is completely different from that of the leaves, flowers, and twigs. Sassafras is the primary root that flavors traditional "root beer," which is now rarely sold. Food or drink containing sas- safras root was banned (sort of, but not explicitly) due to research concluding in that of its components, safrole, caused cancer in rats when fed to them one quantities. However, safrole is dissipated by drying and destroyed Gumbo by enormous and so may not even be present in traditional sassafras drinks. no safrole. filé boiling is still commercially made from sassafras leaves-which contain 107 