BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS
10 Cornelian-cherry
2
Cornus mas Cornaceae (Dogwood family)
with scaly bark, entire leaves with prominent veins difficulty reconverg- 2.
ing QUICK at the ID leaf Small tip umbels tree of yellow flowers, and oblong shiny red fruit. ID
Large shrub to small tree, often with multiple trunks, to 30 (9 m) tall.
DESCRIPTION: crooked, to 10" (25 cm) thick, the bark at maturity covered with thin gray-brown thin exfoli-
flakes Twigs when greenish older, the terminal buds bulging and ridged. Leaves paired, ovate, entire, 2.5-5" is (6.4-13 finely hairy cm)
Trunks to reddish and hairy at first, becoming brownish with a
ating often layer curled, with broadly acute to obtuse bases and abruptly pointed tips. The surface veins per
long, both sides. Midvein depressed, offset by yellowish color. There are 3-5 prominent secondary out and
side on emanating in the lower half of the leaf, strongly depressed above and protruding below, that arch umbel of
back toward the tip. Veinlets are flat above. Petioles about 5% of blade length. Inflorescence an
14-24 at the end of a short stub, the pedicels all about the same length, each umbel with 4 broad, cupped,
hairy bracts behind it. Flowers (early spring before the leaves) yellow in all parts, 5-9 mm across, with 4 ovate,
pointed, recurved petals; 4 curved, projecting stamens; and a single pistil with a broad disk around the base.
Fruit oblong, olive- or slightly pear-shaped, 0.6-0,8" (15-20 mm), with a small dimple on each end but oth-
erwise smooth, bright red when ripe in fall, containing a single elongated, hard stone that is not flattened.
Pedicel about 70% of fruit length.
HABITAT: Old farmsteads, brushy areas, parks, roadsides, disturbed
woods, urban areas, forest edges. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Fruit matures in early fall and is best when very ripe-you
may want to let them sit to ripen further after picking. They are very
sour but delicious in jams, jellies, pies, fruit leather. etc.-or just to snack
on, if you're into sour fruit.
COMMENTS: Cornelian-cherry has been extensively planted in some
areas for wildlife, and like Eurasian crabapples it has gone feral in mod-
erate numbers but has not yet become a problematic invasive plant.
106
BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS 10 Cornelian-cherry 2 Cornus mas Cornaceae (Dogwood family) with scaly bark, entire leaves with prominent veins difficulty reconverg- 2. ing QUICK at the ID leaf Small tip umbels tree of yellow flowers, and oblong shiny red fruit. ID Large shrub to small tree, often with multiple trunks, to 30 (9 m) tall. DESCRIPTION: crooked, to 10" (25 cm) thick, the bark at maturity covered with thin gray-brown thin exfoli- flakes Twigs when greenish older, the terminal buds bulging and ridged. Leaves paired, ovate, entire, 2.5-5" is (6.4-13 finely hairy cm) Trunks to reddish and hairy at first, becoming brownish with a ating often layer curled, with broadly acute to obtuse bases and abruptly pointed tips. The surface veins per long, both sides. Midvein depressed, offset by yellowish color. There are 3-5 prominent secondary out and side on emanating in the lower half of the leaf, strongly depressed above and protruding below, that arch umbel of back toward the tip. Veinlets are flat above. Petioles about 5% of blade length. Inflorescence an 14-24 at the end of a short stub, the pedicels all about the same length, each umbel with 4 broad, cupped, hairy bracts behind it. Flowers (early spring before the leaves) yellow in all parts, 5-9 mm across, with 4 ovate, pointed, recurved petals; 4 curved, projecting stamens; and a single pistil with a broad disk around the base. Fruit oblong, olive- or slightly pear-shaped, 0.6-0,8" (15-20 mm), with a small dimple on each end but oth- erwise smooth, bright red when ripe in fall, containing a single elongated, hard stone that is not flattened. Pedicel about 70% of fruit length. HABITAT: Old farmsteads, brushy areas, parks, roadsides, disturbed woods, urban areas, forest edges. Introduced. FOOD USE: Fruit matures in early fall and is best when very ripe-you may want to let them sit to ripen further after picking. They are very sour but delicious in jams, jellies, pies, fruit leather. etc.-or just to snack on, if you're into sour fruit. COMMENTS: Cornelian-cherry has been extensively planted in some areas for wildlife, and like Eurasian crabapples it has gone feral in mod- erate numbers but has not yet become a problematic invasive plant. 106 