BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS
12 bumelia
Sideroxylon Woolly lanuginosum family Sapotaceae
QUICK ID: Short tree with a bushy crown, flowers, entire, and black blunt-tipped, fruit in early tufted fall. leaves ID difficulty that are 2.
DESCRIPTION: felty below, milky Shrub sap, or tiny small summer tree to 40' (12 m) tall, with spur milky branches sap, the trunk or naked usually thorns single older to
and erect. Trees may furrowed be unarmed with narrow, or have flaky, thorn-tipped reddish to chocolate of slow-growing brown ridges spurs on and
0.8" (2cm). Bark shoots are densely pubescent. Branches consist thick, sparse, and strongly
zigzag.
New
growth
fast-growing trunks. red-brown New and shoots, woolly yielding with alternate an odd, crooked leaves; older crown. twigs Twigs scar-roughened are hairless with spurs. white lenticels Leaves 0.5-4" and tufted (1.3-10 drooping. leaves. cm)
On is still older branches the leaf tufts are borne deciduous on stout, (nearly evergreen in the Deep South), often tips blunt to
long-much smaller on old spurs, tardily obovate to elliptic, often wavy or wrinkled, the above only at
Blades simple, entire, leathery, oblanceolate base, or the margins downcurved. Surface pubescent of blade
rounded or notched, tapered to a narrow woolly. Secondary veins and veinlets are flat above. Petiole Flowers 2-5% (sum-
first; the underside channeled, remains hairy. densely Inflorescence a sessile umbel of 8-40 flowers, with from leaf lobes, axils. the corolla white
length, reddish, wide, bell-shaped, the calyx light greenish brown 5 Fruit ovoid to
mer) sweet-fragrant, each lobe 4 split mm at the tip into 3 parts. Inside the corolla is a whorl of false petals. milky when
and 5-lobed, 6-12 mm long, on a drooping pedicel about as long, usually with a sharp beak protruding, the flesh green
elliptic, ripening in September or October to shiny and black, the skin smooth and glossy, Seed single, large,
and immature, thin with lengthwise lines. It has a small, light-brown calyx of 6 blunt lobes at the base. whitish kernel.
oblong, smooth, brown, with a light zone near the base and a thin, brittle shell over an oily
HABITAT: Well-drained sandy woodlands, old fields. sandy coastal scrub, open rocky slopes, fence lines,
forest edges, streamsides in arid areas. Native.
FOOD USE: The fruit tastes like a cross between dates and buckthorn berries-sweet but bitter. The skins are
thick and annoying but not tough. I like to nibble them while hiking
but probably won't be making a bumelia pie. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: A common tree in much of the South, the fruits
of which are an important food for many birds. Other species
of bumelia (genus Sideroxylon) are safe to eat but not choice.
AKA buckthorn bully, gum bully, gum bumelia, chittamwood,
Bumelia lanuginosa.
108
BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS 12 bumelia Sideroxylon Woolly lanuginosum family Sapotaceae QUICK ID: Short tree with a bushy crown, flowers, entire, and black blunt-tipped, fruit in early tufted fall. leaves ID difficulty that are 2. DESCRIPTION: felty below, milky Shrub sap, or tiny small summer tree to 40' (12 m) tall, with spur milky branches sap, the trunk or naked usually thorns single older to and erect. Trees may furrowed be unarmed with narrow, or have flaky, thorn-tipped reddish to chocolate of slow-growing brown ridges spurs on and 0.8" (2cm). Bark shoots are densely pubescent. Branches consist thick, sparse, and strongly zigzag. New growth fast-growing trunks. red-brown New and shoots, woolly yielding with alternate an odd, crooked leaves; older crown. twigs Twigs scar-roughened are hairless with spurs. white lenticels Leaves 0.5-4" and tufted (1.3-10 drooping. leaves. cm) On is still older branches the leaf tufts are borne deciduous on stout, (nearly evergreen in the Deep South), often tips blunt to long-much smaller on old spurs, tardily obovate to elliptic, often wavy or wrinkled, the above only at Blades simple, entire, leathery, oblanceolate base, or the margins downcurved. Surface pubescent of blade rounded or notched, tapered to a narrow woolly. Secondary veins and veinlets are flat above. Petiole Flowers 2-5% (sum- first; the underside channeled, remains hairy. densely Inflorescence a sessile umbel of 8-40 flowers, with from leaf lobes, axils. the corolla white length, reddish, wide, bell-shaped, the calyx light greenish brown 5 Fruit ovoid to mer) sweet-fragrant, each lobe 4 split mm at the tip into 3 parts. Inside the corolla is a whorl of false petals. milky when and 5-lobed, 6-12 mm long, on a drooping pedicel about as long, usually with a sharp beak protruding, the flesh green elliptic, ripening in September or October to shiny and black, the skin smooth and glossy, Seed single, large, and immature, thin with lengthwise lines. It has a small, light-brown calyx of 6 blunt lobes at the base. whitish kernel. oblong, smooth, brown, with a light zone near the base and a thin, brittle shell over an oily HABITAT: Well-drained sandy woodlands, old fields. sandy coastal scrub, open rocky slopes, fence lines, forest edges, streamsides in arid areas. Native. FOOD USE: The fruit tastes like a cross between dates and buckthorn berries-sweet but bitter. The skins are thick and annoying but not tough. I like to nibble them while hiking but probably won't be making a bumelia pie. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: A common tree in much of the South, the fruits of which are an important food for many birds. Other species of bumelia (genus Sideroxylon) are safe to eat but not choice. AKA buckthorn bully, gum bully, gum bumelia, chittamwood, Bumelia lanuginosa. 108 