0
1cm
BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS
13 Serviceberry
3
FH-209
genus Amelanchier
Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK ID: Smooth-barked, thornless trees with ovate simple leaves and curstant oi
soft fruit with a 5-part calyx. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Clump-forming shrub or small tree, typically 10-40' (3 m) tall and 1.5-8"
(4-20 cm) in diameter. Trunks curvy with smooth, gray bark. Brand hes almost never have
a sharp angle and taper gently to thin twigs. Leaves alternate, ovate to ablong or elliptic,
1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, often finely hairy below, with evenly toothed margins Midvein
depressed above, but secondary veins and veinlets are flat. Inflorescence loose, drooping racemes of 12.
the pedicels long and unequal with the lowest being much longer. Flowers (spring) 0.6-1.5" (1.5-4 cm) across
with 5 elongated white petals that are narrowed toward the base, blunt-tipped, often curvy or cupped: there
are 5 sharp-triangular sepals and multiple stamens. Fruit ripens from late spring to late summer depending
on species and location; round to slightly oblong, soft, juicy, red-purple, with delicate skin and a persistent
5-part calyx on the end. Seeds 5-10, chewy.
SPECIES: Serviceberries as a group are easy to recognize but the species are difficult to distinguish and often
hybridize. Such technicalities are ignored here.
HABITAT: Usually well-drained, sunny sites. Roadsides, old fields, fencer
ows, steep slopes, cutovers, young woods, streambanks, ridge tops,
barrens. Most common in areas of poor soil. Native.
FOOD USE: The berries soften before fully darkening and developing
their best flavor, but in many areas birds remove them before they ripen.
Serviceberries are very soft and spoil quickly, so they must be used or
stored immediately after picking. You can strain out the seeds, but some
people like them. Serviceberries make good pie, jam, or juice; they are
superb for eating fresh and delicious dried. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This berry is common, underappreciated, and variable in
quality. Despite the prevalent etymological myth, the name "serviceberry"
has nothing to do with church services. Until about 1900 this berry was for
called "sarviss" in English-a name derived from the Latin sorbus
another fruiting tree, possibly mountain-ash. Today, serviceberries 'saska- are
grown commercially-mostly in Saskatchewan, under the name
toon." AKA juneberry, shadbush.
0 1cm BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS 13 Serviceberry 3 FH-209 genus Amelanchier Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK ID: Smooth-barked, thornless trees with ovate simple leaves and curstant oi soft fruit with a 5-part calyx. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Clump-forming shrub or small tree, typically 10-40' (3 m) tall and 1.5-8" (4-20 cm) in diameter. Trunks curvy with smooth, gray bark. Brand hes almost never have a sharp angle and taper gently to thin twigs. Leaves alternate, ovate to ablong or elliptic, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, often finely hairy below, with evenly toothed margins Midvein depressed above, but secondary veins and veinlets are flat. Inflorescence loose, drooping racemes of 12. the pedicels long and unequal with the lowest being much longer. Flowers (spring) 0.6-1.5" (1.5-4 cm) across with 5 elongated white petals that are narrowed toward the base, blunt-tipped, often curvy or cupped: there are 5 sharp-triangular sepals and multiple stamens. Fruit ripens from late spring to late summer depending on species and location; round to slightly oblong, soft, juicy, red-purple, with delicate skin and a persistent 5-part calyx on the end. Seeds 5-10, chewy. SPECIES: Serviceberries as a group are easy to recognize but the species are difficult to distinguish and often hybridize. Such technicalities are ignored here. HABITAT: Usually well-drained, sunny sites. Roadsides, old fields, fencer ows, steep slopes, cutovers, young woods, streambanks, ridge tops, barrens. Most common in areas of poor soil. Native. FOOD USE: The berries soften before fully darkening and developing their best flavor, but in many areas birds remove them before they ripen. Serviceberries are very soft and spoil quickly, so they must be used or stored immediately after picking. You can strain out the seeds, but some people like them. Serviceberries make good pie, jam, or juice; they are superb for eating fresh and delicious dried. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This berry is common, underappreciated, and variable in quality. Despite the prevalent etymological myth, the name "serviceberry" has nothing to do with church services. Until about 1900 this berry was for called "sarviss" in English-a name derived from the Latin sorbus another fruiting tree, possibly mountain-ash. Today, serviceberries 'saska- are grown commercially-mostly in Saskatchewan, under the name toon." AKA juneberry, shadbush. 