mm
0
1cm
BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS
15 Mayhaw
3
Crataegus
aestivalis,
C.
opaca
Rosaceae (Rose family)
Quick leaves ID: and Broad, bushy-topped, thorny little tree growing in or near water, with
bright red fruit ripening in spring. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: crown dense and Large shrub or small tree to 30' (9 m) tall, the trunk usually
and rounded. Bark gray-brown and scaly when mature. Branches single, the
gray, usually with stout, sharp, simple thorns to 1.5" (3.8 cm) long (more smooth
young growth). Leaves alternate, often tufted and held vertically, highly variable prevalent in on
but most often elliptic to obovate, 0.7-3" (1.8-8 cm) long, the bases tapered and the form tips
obtusely and hairless pointed. New shoots have larger, broader, sometimes deeply lobed leaves. Surface usually rounded or
above; the underside has rusty fuzz tufted in the major vein axils, Margins untoothed dark, glossy,
base but with small, blunt, erratically spaced teeth distally, often with a dark gland on the tooth tip. near Petioles the
about equal to blade length. Flowers (early spring) single or in umbels of 2-4 directly from the twig, 0.7" (1.8
cm) across, with 5 sepals and 5 white to faintly pinkish petals and 20 stamens. Fruit roundish, ripening red or
occasionally yellow-orange, sometimes slightly translucent, 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm), with shriveled remains of the
5-part calyx at the tip; ripening in spring to early summer, containing several hard seeds.
SPECIES: The two listed are very similar and some taxonomists do not separate them. The biggest difference
is that the western mayhaw C. opaca ripens somewhat later, into early summer.
HABITAT: Pond and slough margins, forest depressions, swamps, floodplains, clay flats, often standing in
shallow water. Prefers moderate to full sun. Native.
FOOD USE: The ripe, pectin-rich haws are a good nibble and make excellent jelly, jam, juice, etc. They can
often be gathered in great quantity from a single tree. Traditionally they were harvested by shaking branches
over the water and collecting them with a net.
COMMENTS: This exceptional, early-ripening hawthorn is an almost-
legendary wild edible in its range. There are even a few mayhaw fes-
tivals, a breeding program at Louisiana State University, and a small
network of commercial growers. Not to be confused with mayapple.
The fruit is said by many to be "too sour" to eat as-is, but I like them
a lot, and so do my children.
111
Mayhaw in typical floodplain habitat.
mm 0 1cm BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS 15 Mayhaw 3 Crataegus aestivalis, C. opaca Rosaceae (Rose family) Quick leaves ID: and Broad, bushy-topped, thorny little tree growing in or near water, with bright red fruit ripening in spring. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: crown dense and Large shrub or small tree to 30' (9 m) tall, the trunk usually and rounded. Bark gray-brown and scaly when mature. Branches single, the gray, usually with stout, sharp, simple thorns to 1.5" (3.8 cm) long (more smooth young growth). Leaves alternate, often tufted and held vertically, highly variable prevalent in on but most often elliptic to obovate, 0.7-3" (1.8-8 cm) long, the bases tapered and the form tips obtusely and hairless pointed. New shoots have larger, broader, sometimes deeply lobed leaves. Surface usually rounded or above; the underside has rusty fuzz tufted in the major vein axils, Margins untoothed dark, glossy, base but with small, blunt, erratically spaced teeth distally, often with a dark gland on the tooth tip. near Petioles the about equal to blade length. Flowers (early spring) single or in umbels of 2-4 directly from the twig, 0.7" (1.8 cm) across, with 5 sepals and 5 white to faintly pinkish petals and 20 stamens. Fruit roundish, ripening red or occasionally yellow-orange, sometimes slightly translucent, 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm), with shriveled remains of the 5-part calyx at the tip; ripening in spring to early summer, containing several hard seeds. SPECIES: The two listed are very similar and some taxonomists do not separate them. The biggest difference is that the western mayhaw C. opaca ripens somewhat later, into early summer. HABITAT: Pond and slough margins, forest depressions, swamps, floodplains, clay flats, often standing in shallow water. Prefers moderate to full sun. Native. FOOD USE: The ripe, pectin-rich haws are a good nibble and make excellent jelly, jam, juice, etc. They can often be gathered in great quantity from a single tree. Traditionally they were harvested by shaking branches over the water and collecting them with a net. COMMENTS: This exceptional, early-ripening hawthorn is an almost- legendary wild edible in its range. There are even a few mayhaw fes- tivals, a breeding program at Louisiana State University, and a small network of commercial growers. Not to be confused with mayapple. The fruit is said by many to be "too sour" to eat as-is, but I like them a lot, and so do my children. 111 Mayhaw in typical floodplain habitat. 