BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS
14 Hawthorn
1-3
(Rose
family)
Rosaceae
genus ID: Small Crataegus scrubby trees with broad, irregularly double-toothed 1. leaves, formi-
dable theres. (30 cm) in diameter and 30' (9 m) tall with strongly short,
QUICK and red fruit with a 5-part calyx- ID difficulty
DESCRIPTION: Small trees up to 12" of nearly horizontal grayish branches. branched, Twigs depend-
stout trunks and wide, by spreading strong, crowns smooth, very sharp thorns-simple or Bare trees in winter
zigzag, ing on species. characterized Bark a of mature distance trees by peels their distinctive in long, thin, silver-gray gray strips. hue. Leaves as broad, alternate the blades on new broadly growth ovate but
clustered entire near the base and sharply most spe-
can be told at the from tips of great spurs on older wood, 1-4" (2.5-10 cm) long and almost serrated distally, usually double
01 elliptic to with obovate small lobes. in outline. Midvein Margins and secondary veins deeply and narrowly depressed from 20-60% above of blade on length.
cies, protruding flat-topped clusters of 5-25. Flowers (late spring) showy, 0.5-1" oblong, 0.2-0.8"
toothed or below; veinlets depressed above. Petioles channeled, ranging (13-25 mm) across,
Inflorescence with branching triangular sepals, 5 petals, and many stamens. Fruit spherical to slightly from the end, the
white to mm), pink, in small 5 clusters; ripening to red, with calyx lobes and dried styles protruding
fiesh (5-20 pale yellowish to pink, usually containing 2-5 hard, whitish, asymmetrical seeds.
IMPORTANT SPECIES: There are numerous hawthorn species, and taxonomists famously disagree over
their classification. All are edible, so just taste test the fruit from prospective trees.
HABITAT: Moist to dry soils after disturbance such as fire, windstorms, and human activity. Common in
floodplains, often invading old fields, pastures, roadsides, forest edges, and fence lines. Native.
FOOD USE: The earliest hawthorns will ripen in late summer; others not until late fall. Taste the fruit to see if
it is worth collecting; the best taste like a cross between pears and strawberries. The fruit can be eaten fresh
or strained to remove the seeds and then used in fruit sauce or leather. A rare few are even tangy enough to
make jam. The pulp can also be mixed in quick bread
batter. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: The vexing problem with hawthorns is
that they are almost always heavily infested with grubs.
This problem is 50 prevalent that it can be nearly impos-
sible to find wholesome fruit in many areas.
110
BROADLEAF TREES WITH SMALL FLESHY FRUITS 14 Hawthorn 1-3 (Rose family) Rosaceae genus ID: Small Crataegus scrubby trees with broad, irregularly double-toothed 1. leaves, formi- dable theres. (30 cm) in diameter and 30' (9 m) tall with strongly short, QUICK and red fruit with a 5-part calyx- ID difficulty DESCRIPTION: Small trees up to 12" of nearly horizontal grayish branches. branched, Twigs depend- stout trunks and wide, by spreading strong, crowns smooth, very sharp thorns-simple or Bare trees in winter zigzag, ing on species. characterized Bark a of mature distance trees by peels their distinctive in long, thin, silver-gray gray strips. hue. Leaves as broad, alternate the blades on new broadly growth ovate but clustered entire near the base and sharply most spe- can be told at the from tips of great spurs on older wood, 1-4" (2.5-10 cm) long and almost serrated distally, usually double 01 elliptic to with obovate small lobes. in outline. Midvein Margins and secondary veins deeply and narrowly depressed from 20-60% above of blade on length. cies, protruding flat-topped clusters of 5-25. Flowers (late spring) showy, 0.5-1" oblong, 0.2-0.8" toothed or below; veinlets depressed above. Petioles channeled, ranging (13-25 mm) across, Inflorescence with branching triangular sepals, 5 petals, and many stamens. Fruit spherical to slightly from the end, the white to mm), pink, in small 5 clusters; ripening to red, with calyx lobes and dried styles protruding fiesh (5-20 pale yellowish to pink, usually containing 2-5 hard, whitish, asymmetrical seeds. IMPORTANT SPECIES: There are numerous hawthorn species, and taxonomists famously disagree over their classification. All are edible, so just taste test the fruit from prospective trees. HABITAT: Moist to dry soils after disturbance such as fire, windstorms, and human activity. Common in floodplains, often invading old fields, pastures, roadsides, forest edges, and fence lines. Native. FOOD USE: The earliest hawthorns will ripen in late summer; others not until late fall. Taste the fruit to see if it is worth collecting; the best taste like a cross between pears and strawberries. The fruit can be eaten fresh or strained to remove the seeds and then used in fruit sauce or leather. A rare few are even tangy enough to make jam. The pulp can also be mixed in quick bread batter. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: The vexing problem with hawthorns is that they are almost always heavily infested with grubs. This problem is 50 prevalent that it can be nearly impos- sible to find wholesome fruit in many areas. 110 