GROUP 8 BROADLEAF TREES; FRUIT SMALL AND DRY,
WIND-BORNE, OR A POD
of the woody plants covered in this book, the fruit or seed this is pat- the
For most only edible part. Group 8 is a significant exception to this key
primary In keeping or with the format of the other woody plant groups, of
tern. relies heavily on fruit characteristics even though many different parts in
these trees are edible, and the fruits or seeds are of primary interest
only five cases. Read carefully-Do not assume the fruits are edible just
because the key refers to them. Specialized vocabulary pertaining to legume
flowers can be found on page 681.
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 8
The key is not your final answer!
Fruit a bean-like pod.
Leaf simple, heart-shaped.
1. Redbud
Pods flat, less than 6" (15 cm) long.
or
Pods plump and round, more than 8" long. Catalpa (not edible).
Leaf compound, usually or always lacking end leaflets; pod with pulp inside.
Pods stiff, at least 0.6" (15 mm) thick and 1.5" (3.8 cm) wide; seeds 0.7" (18 mm); leaflets
pointed and ovate.
2. Kentucky coffeetree
or
or
Pods about 1 cm wide, plump, constricted between seeds; leaflets linear.
3. Honey mesquite
Pods flattened, flexible, more than 6" (15 cm) long; seeds less than 1 cm.
4. Honey locust
Leaf compound, with end leaflets; pods without pulp inside (genus Robinia).
Flowers white with a yellow banner.
5. Black locust
Flowers pink to purple.
Twigs and inflorescence covered with sticky glands.
6. Clammy locust
Twigs and inflorescence covered with long, stiff, reddish hairs.
7. Bristly locust
Twigs and inflorescence not covered with sticky glands or long reddish hairs.
B. New Mexican locust
or
Fruit spherical with leathery-shelled seeds in winged clusters.
9. Basswood
Fruit wind-borne with attached fluff or wings.
or
Fluffy parachuted seed; bark white, at least on upper branches.
Tiny winged fruit less than 3 mm wide; leaves of older branches borne on spurs (birches).
10. Quaking aspen
Broken twigs do not smell like wintergreen.
or
Bark whitish to coppery, peeling in papery sheets.
Bark multicolored, breaking into many thin chips or plates.
11. Paper birch
or
Broken twigs smell like wintergreen,
12. River birch
Bark yellow to silvery, peeling into papery sheets or scales.
Bark dark, almost black, breaking into shiny ridges or plates.
13. Yellow birch
Fruits paired and fused, each with a single asymmetrical wing more than 1 cm (maples).
14. Sweet birch
Leaf simple, palmately lobed.
Leaf margin with just 2 few large, blunt teeth.
or or
Leaf margin with numerous sharp teeth,
15. Sugar maple
Samaras less than 1" (2.5 cm), twigs red, leaf pale below.
Leaf compound.
Samaras more than 1.5" (3.8 cm), twigs brown, leaf silvery below.
16, Red maple
Fruit a disk-like wing around a flattened seed (elms).
17. Silver maple
18, Boxelder
Leaf Leaf less 4" (10 cm) or more, folded along midvein, sandpapery-rough above.
than 4" (10 cm), not folded or sandpapery on top.
19, Slippery eim
20, Siberian elm
112
GROUP 8 BROADLEAF TREES; FRUIT SMALL AND DRY, WIND-BORNE, OR A POD of the woody plants covered in this book, the fruit or seed this is pat- the For most only edible part. Group 8 is a significant exception to this key primary In keeping or with the format of the other woody plant groups, of tern. relies heavily on fruit characteristics even though many different parts in these trees are edible, and the fruits or seeds are of primary interest only five cases. Read carefully-Do not assume the fruits are edible just because the key refers to them. Specialized vocabulary pertaining to legume flowers can be found on page 681. TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 8 The key is not your final answer! Fruit a bean-like pod. Leaf simple, heart-shaped. 1. Redbud Pods flat, less than 6" (15 cm) long. or Pods plump and round, more than 8" long. Catalpa (not edible). Leaf compound, usually or always lacking end leaflets; pod with pulp inside. Pods stiff, at least 0.6" (15 mm) thick and 1.5" (3.8 cm) wide; seeds 0.7" (18 mm); leaflets pointed and ovate. 2. Kentucky coffeetree or or Pods about 1 cm wide, plump, constricted between seeds; leaflets linear. 3. Honey mesquite Pods flattened, flexible, more than 6" (15 cm) long; seeds less than 1 cm. 4. Honey locust Leaf compound, with end leaflets; pods without pulp inside (genus Robinia). Flowers white with a yellow banner. 5. Black locust Flowers pink to purple. Twigs and inflorescence covered with sticky glands. 6. Clammy locust Twigs and inflorescence covered with long, stiff, reddish hairs. 7. Bristly locust Twigs and inflorescence not covered with sticky glands or long reddish hairs. B. New Mexican locust or Fruit spherical with leathery-shelled seeds in winged clusters. 9. Basswood Fruit wind-borne with attached fluff or wings. or Fluffy parachuted seed; bark white, at least on upper branches. Tiny winged fruit less than 3 mm wide; leaves of older branches borne on spurs (birches). 10. Quaking aspen Broken twigs do not smell like wintergreen. or Bark whitish to coppery, peeling in papery sheets. Bark multicolored, breaking into many thin chips or plates. 11. Paper birch or Broken twigs smell like wintergreen, 12. River birch Bark yellow to silvery, peeling into papery sheets or scales. Bark dark, almost black, breaking into shiny ridges or plates. 13. Yellow birch Fruits paired and fused, each with a single asymmetrical wing more than 1 cm (maples). 14. Sweet birch Leaf simple, palmately lobed. Leaf margin with just 2 few large, blunt teeth. or or Leaf margin with numerous sharp teeth, 15. Sugar maple Samaras less than 1" (2.5 cm), twigs red, leaf pale below. Leaf compound. Samaras more than 1.5" (3.8 cm), twigs brown, leaf silvery below. 16, Red maple Fruit a disk-like wing around a flattened seed (elms). 17. Silver maple 18, Boxelder Leaf Leaf less 4" (10 cm) or more, folded along midvein, sandpapery-rough above. than 4" (10 cm), not folded or sandpapery on top. 19, Slippery eim 20, Siberian elm 112 