1 Redbud $ 2 2
Cercis canadensis Fabaceae (Bean family)
QUICK CHECK: Small tree with entire, heart-shaped leaves, irregular pink flowers borne
directly from older branches, and small, thin pods. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Small understory tree up to 30' (9 m) tall, with a spreading crown. Bark
thin, short, narrow, peeling gray strips, revealing orange-brown beneath. Twigs with
brown at first becoming dark gray, the buds tiny, 1-1.5 mm; flower buds 2-3 mm and smooth, plump,
red with dark scales. Leaves simple, alternate, thin, 3-5" (8-13 cm) long, heart-shaped, with
pointed tips, shallow basal lobes, and entire margins. Blades are hairless, grayish below, with 7 main veins from
the base that are slightly depressed to flat. New leaves reddish and cupped with wavy margins. Petioles stiff
and straight, often angled above the twig, rounded with no channel, bulged at both ends, 40-70% of blade
length and out of plane with it. Flowers (spring) 9-12 mm across, pink-purple, pea-like with 5 unequal petals,
borne in short-stalked clusters of 4-8 on older wood. The location of flower clusters is highly unusual-they
often come directly out of medium to large branches or trunks. Pods 2-4" (5-10 cm) long, 0.4-0.7" (10-18 mm)
wide, flat, thin, pointed at both ends, dark brown at maturity, often persisting into winter, the surface veiny,
the top with a wing rising above a ridge on each side. Pedicel 9-15 mm in fruit. Seeds several, flat, 4-5 mm long,
turning dark red and then brown.
HABITAT: Hardwood forests with rich soil, especially slopes, valleys, and forest edges. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather flowers in spring, preferably unopened or recently opened. Use as a garnish, in salads, or
as a snack. They can be steeped in hot water to make a drink or jelly. Newly formed young pods can be eaten
raw or cooked. (Do not eat mature pods or seeds.) Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: An abundant understory tree over much of our region, blooming redbuds are a beautiful feature
of spring landscapes. The flowers make a delightful addition to seasonal dishes.
113
Immature redbud pods.
1 Redbud $ 2 2 Cercis canadensis Fabaceae (Bean family) QUICK CHECK: Small tree with entire, heart-shaped leaves, irregular pink flowers borne directly from older branches, and small, thin pods. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Small understory tree up to 30' (9 m) tall, with a spreading crown. Bark thin, short, narrow, peeling gray strips, revealing orange-brown beneath. Twigs with brown at first becoming dark gray, the buds tiny, 1-1.5 mm; flower buds 2-3 mm and smooth, plump, red with dark scales. Leaves simple, alternate, thin, 3-5" (8-13 cm) long, heart-shaped, with pointed tips, shallow basal lobes, and entire margins. Blades are hairless, grayish below, with 7 main veins from the base that are slightly depressed to flat. New leaves reddish and cupped with wavy margins. Petioles stiff and straight, often angled above the twig, rounded with no channel, bulged at both ends, 40-70% of blade length and out of plane with it. Flowers (spring) 9-12 mm across, pink-purple, pea-like with 5 unequal petals, borne in short-stalked clusters of 4-8 on older wood. The location of flower clusters is highly unusual-they often come directly out of medium to large branches or trunks. Pods 2-4" (5-10 cm) long, 0.4-0.7" (10-18 mm) wide, flat, thin, pointed at both ends, dark brown at maturity, often persisting into winter, the surface veiny, the top with a wing rising above a ridge on each side. Pedicel 9-15 mm in fruit. Seeds several, flat, 4-5 mm long, turning dark red and then brown. HABITAT: Hardwood forests with rich soil, especially slopes, valleys, and forest edges. Native. FOOD USE: Gather flowers in spring, preferably unopened or recently opened. Use as a garnish, in salads, or as a snack. They can be steeped in hot water to make a drink or jelly. Newly formed young pods can be eaten raw or cooked. (Do not eat mature pods or seeds.) Conservation 1. COMMENTS: An abundant understory tree over much of our region, blooming redbuds are a beautiful feature of spring landscapes. The flowers make a delightful addition to seasonal dishes. 113 Immature redbud pods. 