3
Honey mesquite
2
Prosopis glandulosa
Fabaceae (Bean family)
QUICK CHECK: Scrubby, multi-trunked tree with thorns; twice compound leaves with
, pinnate divisions and linear leaflets; long, narrow, roundish pods. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Small, spreading tree or large shrub, usually with multiple leaning trunks,
up to 30' (9 m) tall and generally crooked, branching close to the ground. Bark dark gray to
reddish brown with rough, peeling ridges. Twigs zigzag and hairless, often with 1-2 spines at
the nodes, the spines up to 2" (5 cm) long, Leaves alternate on new growth but clustered on older branches. They
are twice compound; the petiole forks into two main divisions (occasionally 4), each of which is 3-1 (8-18 cm)
long and pinnately compound. There is a soft spine where the rachis forks. Petioles 30-70 % of the length of
the leaf divisions, with 2 ridges on the upper side, these often with a row of sparse hair. Leaflets 12-36, ses-
sile, paired, well-spaced (not touching), held 90° to the rachis (except near the ends). There is no and leaflet.
Blades linear, entire, rounded or abruptly pointed at the base and tip, 0.8-2" (2-5 cm) long and about 10% as
wide. Both surfaces are hairless and smooth. Secondary veins are obscure and faintly raised above. Inflo-
rescence a drooping, crowded, catkin-like cluster 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, bearing numerous tiny pale yellowish
flowers, each with a 5-lobed calyx, 5 linear petals, and 10 long, protruding stamens. Honey mesquite may flower
any time from spring through late summer when moisture is ideal, but the heaviest flowering occurs in spring
and early summer. Pods 3-9" (8-23 cm) long and about 1 cm wide, nearly straight, plump, constricted between
the several seeds, containing spongy-crumbly, sweet pulp. Seeds oblong, slightly flattened, shiny brown.
HABITAT: Semi-arid flat lands and hill country, especially where sandy. Native.
FOOD USE: Pulverize and sift dry pods to make a sweet flour from the pulp that can be added to baked goods
or hot cereal. Or just grab a pod and chew on it. Avoid moldy, fallen pods. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Mesquite flour has been a staple food for many people in its range and is still widely harvested
and available commercially. Mesquite is better known as a dense wood good for smoking meats and as a "weed
tree" of Texas range lands. In a quiet ecocide ignored by the media, mil-
lions of acres of mesquite lands are being aerially sprayed with herbicide,
destroying most of the native plant community.
115
3 Honey mesquite 2 Prosopis glandulosa Fabaceae (Bean family) QUICK CHECK: Scrubby, multi-trunked tree with thorns; twice compound leaves with , pinnate divisions and linear leaflets; long, narrow, roundish pods. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Small, spreading tree or large shrub, usually with multiple leaning trunks, up to 30' (9 m) tall and generally crooked, branching close to the ground. Bark dark gray to reddish brown with rough, peeling ridges. Twigs zigzag and hairless, often with 1-2 spines at the nodes, the spines up to 2" (5 cm) long, Leaves alternate on new growth but clustered on older branches. They are twice compound; the petiole forks into two main divisions (occasionally 4), each of which is 3-1 (8-18 cm) long and pinnately compound. There is a soft spine where the rachis forks. Petioles 30-70 % of the length of the leaf divisions, with 2 ridges on the upper side, these often with a row of sparse hair. Leaflets 12-36, ses- sile, paired, well-spaced (not touching), held 90° to the rachis (except near the ends). There is no and leaflet. Blades linear, entire, rounded or abruptly pointed at the base and tip, 0.8-2" (2-5 cm) long and about 10% as wide. Both surfaces are hairless and smooth. Secondary veins are obscure and faintly raised above. Inflo- rescence a drooping, crowded, catkin-like cluster 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, bearing numerous tiny pale yellowish flowers, each with a 5-lobed calyx, 5 linear petals, and 10 long, protruding stamens. Honey mesquite may flower any time from spring through late summer when moisture is ideal, but the heaviest flowering occurs in spring and early summer. Pods 3-9" (8-23 cm) long and about 1 cm wide, nearly straight, plump, constricted between the several seeds, containing spongy-crumbly, sweet pulp. Seeds oblong, slightly flattened, shiny brown. HABITAT: Semi-arid flat lands and hill country, especially where sandy. Native. FOOD USE: Pulverize and sift dry pods to make a sweet flour from the pulp that can be added to baked goods or hot cereal. Or just grab a pod and chew on it. Avoid moldy, fallen pods. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Mesquite flour has been a staple food for many people in its range and is still widely harvested and available commercially. Mesquite is better known as a dense wood good for smoking meats and as a "weed tree" of Texas range lands. In a quiet ecocide ignored by the media, mil- lions of acres of mesquite lands are being aerially sprayed with herbicide, destroying most of the native plant community. 115 