BROADLEAF TREES; FRUIT SMALL AND DRY, WIND-BORNER
IWE-178
2 Kentucky coffeetree
1
3
(immature)
Fabaceae
(Bean
family)
dioicus
QUICK Gymnocladus CHECK Doubly compound leaves with ovate leaflets and stout pods; seeds
more suckers to form colonies, the trunk straight and covered domi-
than 0.6" (1.5 cm) wide. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Tree spreading loose, by narrow crown. Bark of mature trees thin, densely
nant, to 100' (30 scales m) tall, or with chips a curling sideways. Twigs very thick, blunt, at buds first absent;
with covered dark with brown short reddish hairs but later peeling with leaf a scars. thin crust. Leaves Terminal enormous, alternate, doubly-compound, Petiole thick,
side buds are tiny, placed above enormous last concave emerge in spring and the first to fall in autumn. pinnately
up to 38" hairless, m) long; often they reddish, are among with the a light to bloom, bearing 6-10 rachis divisions, or each ovate with with 6-15 pointed tips,
arranged leaflets, the entire end or minutely toothed. Midvein and secondary veins are faintly the female
rounded, leaflet absent. Leaflets, 1.5-3" (4-8 cm) long, elliptic depressed above.
hairless, the margins male and female usually on separate trees, the male in clusters 3-4" (8-10 cm) long, into linear,
Inflorescence (23-30 cm). Flowers (early summer) 10-12 mm across with a hairy tube widening 5 wide,
keeled, clusters whitish 9-12" petals alternating with 5 narrower sepais. Pod 4-9" (10-23 cm) long, 1.5-2.2" (3.8-5.5 dark, flat-
and at least 0.6" (15 mm) thick, ripening to dark brown and often persisting into winter. Seeds 4-7,
tened, lentil-shaped, very hard with a thick shell, about 0.7" (18 mm) across, embedded in sticky greenish pulp.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Honeylocust has thinner twigs, smaller leaflets, and thinner, longer, twisted pods.
HABITAT: Rich soils of lower slopes, river floodplains, and valleys, but above the regularly flooded zone. Also
commonly planted as an ornamentai. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather ripe pods from fall through winter,
extract the seeds, and roast at 350°F for 20 minutes
or until the shells are brittle, then crack them with a
nutcracker. Remove kernel from the shell and roast at
35° until dark brown, then grind and brew like coffee.
Seeds roasted less dark can also be eaten boiled or
ground into flour to mix sparingly into baked goods.
Immature seeds, gathered when the pods are still
pinkish to yellow in mid to late summer, can be cut
with a knife, peeled, boiled, and used like fava beans.
Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Of the many coffee substitutes touted
in the wild food literature, this one is perhaps the best.
The immature beans are excellent, versatile, and easy
to gather. This common street tree is a
great find for urban foragers.
WARNING: Seeds should not be eaten
crewed raw
114
The green unripe seeds are like fava beans.
BROADLEAF TREES; FRUIT SMALL AND DRY, WIND-BORNER IWE-178 2 Kentucky coffeetree 1 3 (immature) Fabaceae (Bean family) dioicus QUICK Gymnocladus CHECK Doubly compound leaves with ovate leaflets and stout pods; seeds more suckers to form colonies, the trunk straight and covered domi- than 0.6" (1.5 cm) wide. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Tree spreading loose, by narrow crown. Bark of mature trees thin, densely nant, to 100' (30 scales m) tall, or with chips a curling sideways. Twigs very thick, blunt, at buds first absent; with covered dark with brown short reddish hairs but later peeling with leaf a scars. thin crust. Leaves Terminal enormous, alternate, doubly-compound, Petiole thick, side buds are tiny, placed above enormous last concave emerge in spring and the first to fall in autumn. pinnately up to 38" hairless, m) long; often they reddish, are among with the a light to bloom, bearing 6-10 rachis divisions, or each ovate with with 6-15 pointed tips, arranged leaflets, the entire end or minutely toothed. Midvein and secondary veins are faintly the female rounded, leaflet absent. Leaflets, 1.5-3" (4-8 cm) long, elliptic depressed above. hairless, the margins male and female usually on separate trees, the male in clusters 3-4" (8-10 cm) long, into linear, Inflorescence (23-30 cm). Flowers (early summer) 10-12 mm across with a hairy tube widening 5 wide, keeled, clusters whitish 9-12" petals alternating with 5 narrower sepais. Pod 4-9" (10-23 cm) long, 1.5-2.2" (3.8-5.5 dark, flat- and at least 0.6" (15 mm) thick, ripening to dark brown and often persisting into winter. Seeds 4-7, tened, lentil-shaped, very hard with a thick shell, about 0.7" (18 mm) across, embedded in sticky greenish pulp. CONFUSING PLANTS: Honeylocust has thinner twigs, smaller leaflets, and thinner, longer, twisted pods. HABITAT: Rich soils of lower slopes, river floodplains, and valleys, but above the regularly flooded zone. Also commonly planted as an ornamentai. Native. FOOD USE: Gather ripe pods from fall through winter, extract the seeds, and roast at 350°F for 20 minutes or until the shells are brittle, then crack them with a nutcracker. Remove kernel from the shell and roast at 35° until dark brown, then grind and brew like coffee. Seeds roasted less dark can also be eaten boiled or ground into flour to mix sparingly into baked goods. Immature seeds, gathered when the pods are still pinkish to yellow in mid to late summer, can be cut with a knife, peeled, boiled, and used like fava beans. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Of the many coffee substitutes touted in the wild food literature, this one is perhaps the best. The immature beans are excellent, versatile, and easy to gather. This common street tree is a great find for urban foragers. WARNING: Seeds should not be eaten crewed raw 114 The green unripe seeds are like fava beans. 