08
Honeylocust
1
4
Gleditsia triacanthos
Fabaceae
(Bean
family)
QUICK CHECK: Long, flat, spiraled or curling pods; pinnately compound leaves.
ID difficulty 2.
Tree with a single erect trunk and spreading crown. Bark rather wild smooth trees
DESCRIPTION: but on older trees peels into plates, chips, or curved ridges. Most trees
when scattered young, bunches of branching antler-like thorns up to7" (18 cm) long. (Street reddish
are thornless branched but sometimes simple) and tiny, often clumped buds. Leaves alternate and leaves once are or
have cultivars.) Twigs zigzag, shiny, red-brown at first turning gray, with
thorns (usually compound (twice compound more common on vigorous shoots). Once-compound have 6-12 pin-
twice (13-15 pinnately cm) long with 14-30 leaflets, the leaflets paired or offset. Twice compound leaves and rachises
5-6" nate divisions, each of which averages slightly smaller than a once-compound leaf. The petiole
are faintly hairy. End leaflets are usually absent but occasionally present. Leaflets 0.6-1.6" (1.5-4 cm) long,
sessile or nearly so, thin, narrowly ovate or elliptic with a blunt tip and a bristle. Surface smooth, semi-glossy,
hairless or nearly so above but with minute hairs on the lighter undersurface. Major veins are faintly raised
above. Margins entire or with tiny rounded teeth. Inflorescence crowded, hanging, compact racemes 2-4"
(5-10 cm) long. Flowers (early summer) tiny, light yellow-green, fragrant, with 3-5 hairy sepals and 3-5 pet-
als. Pods flattened, about 1" (2.5 cm) wide and 8-14" (20-36 cm) long, burgundy-brown when ripe in autumn,
filled with sticky pulp and several hard, flattened, oval seeds about 1 cm long.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Water locust G. aquatica is similar in appearance and inhabits swamps in much of
the South; however, its pods are extremely short and typically contain just one seed.
HABITAT: River floodplain forests and rich valleys. Also scattered invading pastures and disturbed sites.
Native, but frequently planted as an ornamental well beyond its natural range.
FOOD USE: The puip in ripe pods is very sweet with a variably bitter aftertaste and a slight irritating qual-
ity. Every now and then I chew on this pulp until it bothers my throat. Crushed pods can be steeped to make
a drink. I have heard
reliable reports of the
seeás being soaked
and boiled like beans,
but I have not tried
this. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: The
thorns are almost
terrifying. The pods
are produced so copi-
ously that I fantasize
about finding some
way to get good food
out of them. At least
the deer love them.
116
08 Honeylocust 1 4 Gleditsia triacanthos Fabaceae (Bean family) QUICK CHECK: Long, flat, spiraled or curling pods; pinnately compound leaves. ID difficulty 2. Tree with a single erect trunk and spreading crown. Bark rather wild smooth trees DESCRIPTION: but on older trees peels into plates, chips, or curved ridges. Most trees when scattered young, bunches of branching antler-like thorns up to7" (18 cm) long. (Street reddish are thornless branched but sometimes simple) and tiny, often clumped buds. Leaves alternate and leaves once are or have cultivars.) Twigs zigzag, shiny, red-brown at first turning gray, with thorns (usually compound (twice compound more common on vigorous shoots). Once-compound have 6-12 pin- twice (13-15 pinnately cm) long with 14-30 leaflets, the leaflets paired or offset. Twice compound leaves and rachises 5-6" nate divisions, each of which averages slightly smaller than a once-compound leaf. The petiole are faintly hairy. End leaflets are usually absent but occasionally present. Leaflets 0.6-1.6" (1.5-4 cm) long, sessile or nearly so, thin, narrowly ovate or elliptic with a blunt tip and a bristle. Surface smooth, semi-glossy, hairless or nearly so above but with minute hairs on the lighter undersurface. Major veins are faintly raised above. Margins entire or with tiny rounded teeth. Inflorescence crowded, hanging, compact racemes 2-4" (5-10 cm) long. Flowers (early summer) tiny, light yellow-green, fragrant, with 3-5 hairy sepals and 3-5 pet- als. Pods flattened, about 1" (2.5 cm) wide and 8-14" (20-36 cm) long, burgundy-brown when ripe in autumn, filled with sticky pulp and several hard, flattened, oval seeds about 1 cm long. CONFUSING PLANTS: Water locust G. aquatica is similar in appearance and inhabits swamps in much of the South; however, its pods are extremely short and typically contain just one seed. HABITAT: River floodplain forests and rich valleys. Also scattered invading pastures and disturbed sites. Native, but frequently planted as an ornamental well beyond its natural range. FOOD USE: The puip in ripe pods is very sweet with a variably bitter aftertaste and a slight irritating qual- ity. Every now and then I chew on this pulp until it bothers my throat. Crushed pods can be steeped to make a drink. I have heard reliable reports of the seeás being soaked and boiled like beans, but I have not tried this. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: The thorns are almost terrifying. The pods are produced so copi- ously that I fantasize about finding some way to get good food out of them. At least the deer love them. 116 