DRY,
WIND-BORNE,
OR
A
POD
5
Black locust
3
2
FH-246
Robinia pseudoacacia
Fabaceae
(Bean
family)
QUICK CHECK: Pinnately compound leaves with blunt, entire leaflets, drooping
ters of fragrant white flowers, and small, flat pods with proportionately small seeds due
ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Medium-sized tree spreading by root suckers to form clones. Trunks 30.80
(9-25 m) tall and up to 26" (66 cm) in diameter, erect but crooked, taller than wide even
in full sun. Bark grayish, thick, and deeply furrowed. Twigs moderately thick, smooth and
hairless, with short, stout, curved, laterally flattened, very sharp thorns to 13 mm long-or
Inner area shows
what is believed
2" (5 cm) on vigorous shoots.
to be the original
Mature trees often become
range.
thornless. Leaves alternate, once pinnately com-
pound, 8-17" (20-44 cm) long, with 9.27 leaflets,
the end leaflet present. Rachis enlarged at the base
with 2 tiny appendages sometimes enlarged into
thorns, hairless or with minute hairs, with a broad.
shallow channel. Leaflets entire, elliptic, rounded
at the base, the tips rounded or indented but usu
ally with a tiny extended bristle 1-2.8" (2.5-7 cm)
long. Blade flat and hairless, the midvein slightly
depressed above but other veins flat. Petiolules 5%
of blade length. Inflorescence a hanging crowded
raceme 5-8" (13-20 long containing 8-26 flow-
ers, the pedicels 9-12 mm. Flowers (spring to early
summer) 0.7-1" (18-25 mm) long, pea-like (with 2
wings, a keel in the middle, and a large banner petal
above), white with a yellow spot on the banner
when first open, fading as they age. Pods 3-4" (8-10
cm) long and about 0.6" (15 mm) wide, ripening in
late summer; each contains 4-8 flattened, slightly
oblong seeds 4-5 mm long.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Eve's
necklace Sophora affinis ranges
south from Arkansas and Okla-
homa. This large shrub has no
spines; the leaflets are glossy.
pointed, and widely spaced.
Flowers resemble those of black
locust but are widely spaced
and the keel and sometimes the
wings are purple. The fruit is a
jet-black pod fully constricted
to a thin rod between the seeds.
No part should be eaten
HABITAT: Native to slopes
in the Appalachian and Ozark
regions, possibly elsewhere Has
been planted widely in most or
the US and southern Canada,
often escaping to roadsides
pastures, woodlots and old
fields. Thrives on very poor soil
due to its ability to fix introgen.
(Continued on the next page.)
117
DRY, WIND-BORNE, OR A POD 5 Black locust 3 2 FH-246 Robinia pseudoacacia Fabaceae (Bean family) QUICK CHECK: Pinnately compound leaves with blunt, entire leaflets, drooping ters of fragrant white flowers, and small, flat pods with proportionately small seeds due ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Medium-sized tree spreading by root suckers to form clones. Trunks 30.80 (9-25 m) tall and up to 26" (66 cm) in diameter, erect but crooked, taller than wide even in full sun. Bark grayish, thick, and deeply furrowed. Twigs moderately thick, smooth and hairless, with short, stout, curved, laterally flattened, very sharp thorns to 13 mm long-or Inner area shows what is believed 2" (5 cm) on vigorous shoots. to be the original Mature trees often become range. thornless. Leaves alternate, once pinnately com- pound, 8-17" (20-44 cm) long, with 9.27 leaflets, the end leaflet present. Rachis enlarged at the base with 2 tiny appendages sometimes enlarged into thorns, hairless or with minute hairs, with a broad. shallow channel. Leaflets entire, elliptic, rounded at the base, the tips rounded or indented but usu ally with a tiny extended bristle 1-2.8" (2.5-7 cm) long. Blade flat and hairless, the midvein slightly depressed above but other veins flat. Petiolules 5% of blade length. Inflorescence a hanging crowded raceme 5-8" (13-20 long containing 8-26 flow- ers, the pedicels 9-12 mm. Flowers (spring to early summer) 0.7-1" (18-25 mm) long, pea-like (with 2 wings, a keel in the middle, and a large banner petal above), white with a yellow spot on the banner when first open, fading as they age. Pods 3-4" (8-10 cm) long and about 0.6" (15 mm) wide, ripening in late summer; each contains 4-8 flattened, slightly oblong seeds 4-5 mm long. CONFUSING PLANTS: Eve's necklace Sophora affinis ranges south from Arkansas and Okla- homa. This large shrub has no spines; the leaflets are glossy. pointed, and widely spaced. Flowers resemble those of black locust but are widely spaced and the keel and sometimes the wings are purple. The fruit is a jet-black pod fully constricted to a thin rod between the seeds. No part should be eaten HABITAT: Native to slopes in the Appalachian and Ozark regions, possibly elsewhere Has been planted widely in most or the US and southern Canada, often escaping to roadsides pastures, woodlots and old fields. Thrives on very poor soil due to its ability to fix introgen. (Continued on the next page.) 117 