5 Black Gather locust flowers (continued) soon after or just before dish they you open--before can imagine, the from yellow ice spot cream the pods fades to are chicken or still the green, edges soup.
will FOOD They USE: are delicious raw or by cooked the cluster in almost or in any salads. In mid cooked to late before summer eating. while Their flavor is good seem but to
split Most shelling them often is laborious. open just and eat them strip Dried out raw seeds the small can be beans. gathered These later must and be eaten after thorough boiling, but available they in huge
take forever to soften. Conservation 1.
to
use
and
COMMENTS: You These can smell magnificent-smelling blooming trees from and a block delicious away. old. flowers This seriously are very might easy be the best edible flower in
the world-but you Three native locusts are similar in appearance to black locust widely but smaller-typically outside their regions large
quantities. will be disappointed if they are too
RELATED EDIBLES: flowers). All planted and naturalized Note: I have
of shrubs origin or and small have trees excellent (but with edible larger flowers-although are none are quite as delicious as black locust.
not eaten the beans of any of these.
6 Clammy locust
+
Robinia viscosa
3
small tree is native to scattered locations in the Southeast. The thorns are smaller and
weaker; This the twigs, peduncles, pedicels, calyces, and pods are covered with short, sticky,
glandular hairs, and the leaflets are hairy on the underside. The flowers are light pink.
7 Bristly locust
Robinia hispida
3
Mostly introduced.
Native to the southern Appalachians, this is a shrub or rarely a small tree with gorgeous
pink-purple flowers to 1.2" (3 cm) long, blooming later in the season than black locust and
for a much longer time. The twigs, petioles, and inflorescence are all densely covered in
long, reddish, bristly hairs.
8 New Mexican locust + Robinia neomexicana
3
The natural distribution of this large shrub or small tree barely comes into our region,
but like the others it is planted and escapes outside of its native range. The flowers are
dull pinkish and slightly larger than those of black locust. The racemes are sometimes
compound and the pods are hairy.
Bristly locust
118
Clainmy locust
New Mexican locust.
5 Black Gather locust flowers (continued) soon after or just before dish they you open--before can imagine, the from yellow ice spot cream the pods fades to are chicken or still the green, edges soup. will FOOD They USE: are delicious raw or by cooked the cluster in almost or in any salads. In mid cooked to late before summer eating. while Their flavor is good seem but to split Most shelling them often is laborious. open just and eat them strip Dried out raw seeds the small can be beans. gathered These later must and be eaten after thorough boiling, but available they in huge take forever to soften. Conservation 1. to use and COMMENTS: You These can smell magnificent-smelling blooming trees from and a block delicious away. old. flowers This seriously are very might easy be the best edible flower in the world-but you Three native locusts are similar in appearance to black locust widely but smaller-typically outside their regions large quantities. will be disappointed if they are too RELATED EDIBLES: flowers). All planted and naturalized Note: I have of shrubs origin or and small have trees excellent (but with edible larger flowers-although are none are quite as delicious as black locust. not eaten the beans of any of these. 6 Clammy locust + Robinia viscosa 3 small tree is native to scattered locations in the Southeast. The thorns are smaller and weaker; This the twigs, peduncles, pedicels, calyces, and pods are covered with short, sticky, glandular hairs, and the leaflets are hairy on the underside. The flowers are light pink. 7 Bristly locust Robinia hispida 3 Mostly introduced. Native to the southern Appalachians, this is a shrub or rarely a small tree with gorgeous pink-purple flowers to 1.2" (3 cm) long, blooming later in the season than black locust and for a much longer time. The twigs, petioles, and inflorescence are all densely covered in long, reddish, bristly hairs. 8 New Mexican locust + Robinia neomexicana 3 The natural distribution of this large shrub or small tree barely comes into our region, but like the others it is planted and escapes outside of its native range. The flowers are dull pinkish and slightly larger than those of black locust. The racemes are sometimes compound and the pods are hairy. Bristly locust 118 Clainmy locust New Mexican locust. 