9
Basswood
3
1
3
FH-269
Tilia americana
Malvaceae (Mallow family)
QUICK CHECK: Large, heart-shaped, toothed, alternate leaves; Flowers and Fruit
clusters attached to a long, tongue-like bract. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Large tree to 120' (37 m), much taller than wide even in the open, trunks
often clumped or with a ring of sprouts surrounding the original center trunk. Bark gray,
moderately thick, with many narrow fissures and narrow flat ridges. Twigs stout, smooth,
hairless, gray, zigzag, Buds egg-shaped, blunt, smooth and shiny, covered by 2 large green
to red scales. Leaves large, alternate, heart-shaped, distinctly asymmetrical, 5-9" (13-23
long, hairless on both sides, with sharply toothed margins. Veins nearly
flat above. Petioles 20% of blade length. Inflorescence a cluster of 5-12
attached to the middle of a light yellow-green tongue-like bract that serves
as a wing for wind-dispersal of the whole cluster. Flowers (midsummer)
bisexual, 11-13 mm wide with 5 downy sepals, 5 creamy petals, and a
prominent stigma with a 5-lobed tip. Fruit spherical, 6 mm, the flesh
leathery, the large nut-like seed woody, ripening in autumn and often
persisting into winter.
CONFUSING PLANTS: American mulberry (p. 48) has remarkably
similar leaves, but they are more symmetrical, have depressed second-
ary veins, and are hairy on both sides.
HABITAT: Mixed deciduous forests, preferring rich soil. Native.
FOOD USE: The young leaves are best immediately after the buds
open in spring, when the leaves are still curled; they remain edible
until they reach their full size. You can cook them, but I like them best
raw. In winter you can nibble the buds for a slimy snack. Cambium is
thick and sweet in early summer. Flowers can be steeped for tea, either
dried or fresh. The seeds have tasty kernels that are
impractical to extract; they can be roasted whole to
make a chocolate-like flavoring.
COMMENTS: Linden flower tea is a popular bedtime
drink. Basswood leaves are not as well known, but
in my opinion are the native tree's most important
edible part. AKA linden, lime-but these names
more often refer to Eurasian species.
119
9 Basswood 3 1 3 FH-269 Tilia americana Malvaceae (Mallow family) QUICK CHECK: Large, heart-shaped, toothed, alternate leaves; Flowers and Fruit clusters attached to a long, tongue-like bract. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Large tree to 120' (37 m), much taller than wide even in the open, trunks often clumped or with a ring of sprouts surrounding the original center trunk. Bark gray, moderately thick, with many narrow fissures and narrow flat ridges. Twigs stout, smooth, hairless, gray, zigzag, Buds egg-shaped, blunt, smooth and shiny, covered by 2 large green to red scales. Leaves large, alternate, heart-shaped, distinctly asymmetrical, 5-9" (13-23 long, hairless on both sides, with sharply toothed margins. Veins nearly flat above. Petioles 20% of blade length. Inflorescence a cluster of 5-12 attached to the middle of a light yellow-green tongue-like bract that serves as a wing for wind-dispersal of the whole cluster. Flowers (midsummer) bisexual, 11-13 mm wide with 5 downy sepals, 5 creamy petals, and a prominent stigma with a 5-lobed tip. Fruit spherical, 6 mm, the flesh leathery, the large nut-like seed woody, ripening in autumn and often persisting into winter. CONFUSING PLANTS: American mulberry (p. 48) has remarkably similar leaves, but they are more symmetrical, have depressed second- ary veins, and are hairy on both sides. HABITAT: Mixed deciduous forests, preferring rich soil. Native. FOOD USE: The young leaves are best immediately after the buds open in spring, when the leaves are still curled; they remain edible until they reach their full size. You can cook them, but I like them best raw. In winter you can nibble the buds for a slimy snack. Cambium is thick and sweet in early summer. Flowers can be steeped for tea, either dried or fresh. The seeds have tasty kernels that are impractical to extract; they can be roasted whole to make a chocolate-like flavoring. COMMENTS: Linden flower tea is a popular bedtime drink. Basswood leaves are not as well known, but in my opinion are the native tree's most important edible part. AKA linden, lime-but these names more often refer to Eurasian species. 119 