BIRCH
genus Betula Betulaceae (Birch family)
QUICK CHECK: Trees with simple, toothed, alternate leaves, thin twigs and
bark, and tiny winged seeds. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Erect to leaning trees, trunks single or clumped, the branches thin, delicate-looking, and often
crowded at the tip. Bark smooth and often shiny when young with elongated horizontal lenticels; eventually
peeling horizontally into thin papery flakes or sheets or breaking into smooth-topped plates Twigs thin with
narrowly egg-shaped, pointed buds. (Buds on older spurs are blunt on some species.) Smaller branc nes bear
short spurs, roughened by the ridges of many crowded leaf scars. Leaves alternate on twigs, paired or in sets of 3
on spurs. Blades small and thin, 2.5-5" (6-13 cm) long, ovate, the margins double-toothed, the surfaces variably
fine-hairy or hairless, secondary veins slightly depressed above. Petioles 5-30% of blade length. Flowers hny.
inconspicuous, wind-pollinated in early spring, the male and female separate on the same tree. both hanging
in catkins. Seeds tiny, elliptic, 1-2 mm long with a papery wing on each side, released along with tiny practs
that are shaped either like the silhouette of a bird in flight, or like a bird track.
FOOD USE: Birches can be tapped like maples for their sap; the season partly overlaps but runs later. Birch
sap runs do not require freezing. Fresh sap can be drunk like water, or it can be boiled down to make syrup
It takes 80-120 gallons of white birch sap to make one gallon of syrup, and even more for yellow birch. Birch
syrup burns more easily than maple; it should be finished rapidly at a rolling boil or with constant stirring to avoid
excess time exposed to heat. Yellow and especially sweet birch contain oil of wintergreen in the bark. This can
be extracted in alcohol as a flavoring. The twigs and inner bark can be used to brew tea or birch beer. Syrup
from these trees, however, does not have a wintergreen flavor. The cambium is edible, with good flavor, but
the trees are hard to peel. I have seen reports of the inner bark being eaten but have had no success with this
COMMENTS: We tap 300-400 birches, mostly white and a few yellow, immediately after we pull our mapie
taps out. Maples yield more syrup for the same effort, and most people prefer its flavor over that of birch
However, I enjoy the distinct flavors of both, and birch is a nutritional powerhouse. Once you start to recognize
birch bracts you will notice them littering the forest floor or speckling snowbanks by the millions.
IMPORTANT SPECIES: There are many birches in our region, and all can be tapped, but the following are
most commonly used. All are native.
11 White birch
Betula papyrifera
1
This is the widespread, iconic species of the Far North, growing in poor to moderately
rich soils. The trunks are sometimes clumped, especially after logging, and may grow to
80' (25 m) tall and 2' (60 cm) in diameter. Leaves are broadly ovate with doubly toothed its
margins. Seeds ripen in late summer, and the bracts are bird-in-flight-shaped. Due heart- to
sheer abundance, this is the species most often used for syrup. Another species,
leaved birch B. cordifolia, is sometimes recognized. At a glance people often confuse white to
birch with quaking aspen, but this should never happen when you are close enough
touch (i.e. eat) any part of the tree. AKA paper birch.
121
BIRCH genus Betula Betulaceae (Birch family) QUICK CHECK: Trees with simple, toothed, alternate leaves, thin twigs and bark, and tiny winged seeds. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Erect to leaning trees, trunks single or clumped, the branches thin, delicate-looking, and often crowded at the tip. Bark smooth and often shiny when young with elongated horizontal lenticels; eventually peeling horizontally into thin papery flakes or sheets or breaking into smooth-topped plates Twigs thin with narrowly egg-shaped, pointed buds. (Buds on older spurs are blunt on some species.) Smaller branc nes bear short spurs, roughened by the ridges of many crowded leaf scars. Leaves alternate on twigs, paired or in sets of 3 on spurs. Blades small and thin, 2.5-5" (6-13 cm) long, ovate, the margins double-toothed, the surfaces variably fine-hairy or hairless, secondary veins slightly depressed above. Petioles 5-30% of blade length. Flowers hny. inconspicuous, wind-pollinated in early spring, the male and female separate on the same tree. both hanging in catkins. Seeds tiny, elliptic, 1-2 mm long with a papery wing on each side, released along with tiny practs that are shaped either like the silhouette of a bird in flight, or like a bird track. FOOD USE: Birches can be tapped like maples for their sap; the season partly overlaps but runs later. Birch sap runs do not require freezing. Fresh sap can be drunk like water, or it can be boiled down to make syrup It takes 80-120 gallons of white birch sap to make one gallon of syrup, and even more for yellow birch. Birch syrup burns more easily than maple; it should be finished rapidly at a rolling boil or with constant stirring to avoid excess time exposed to heat. Yellow and especially sweet birch contain oil of wintergreen in the bark. This can be extracted in alcohol as a flavoring. The twigs and inner bark can be used to brew tea or birch beer. Syrup from these trees, however, does not have a wintergreen flavor. The cambium is edible, with good flavor, but the trees are hard to peel. I have seen reports of the inner bark being eaten but have had no success with this COMMENTS: We tap 300-400 birches, mostly white and a few yellow, immediately after we pull our mapie taps out. Maples yield more syrup for the same effort, and most people prefer its flavor over that of birch However, I enjoy the distinct flavors of both, and birch is a nutritional powerhouse. Once you start to recognize birch bracts you will notice them littering the forest floor or speckling snowbanks by the millions. IMPORTANT SPECIES: There are many birches in our region, and all can be tapped, but the following are most commonly used. All are native. 11 White birch Betula papyrifera 1 This is the widespread, iconic species of the Far North, growing in poor to moderately rich soils. The trunks are sometimes clumped, especially after logging, and may grow to 80' (25 m) tall and 2' (60 cm) in diameter. Leaves are broadly ovate with doubly toothed its margins. Seeds ripen in late summer, and the bracts are bird-in-flight-shaped. Due heart- to sheer abundance, this is the species most often used for syrup. Another species, leaved birch B. cordifolia, is sometimes recognized. At a glance people often confuse white to birch with quaking aspen, but this should never happen when you are close enough touch (i.e. eat) any part of the tree. AKA paper birch. 121 