BROADLEAF TREES; FRUIT SMALL
10 Quaking aspen
2
Populus tremuloides Salicaceae (Willow family)
QUICK CHECK: White, powdery bark that does not peel; small broad leaves on vertically
flattened petioles. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Tree spreading by root suckers to form large clones, trunks 50-80'
m) tall with an open, narrow crown. Bark white, smooth, and powdery (sometimes of
(15-25 on branches), becoming dark gray-black, blocky, and furrowed on lower parts
green trunks. Branch bases are often black even where trunks are white. Twigs thin, brittle,
reddish older brown and shiny in the first year, after that becoming grayer, dull, and hairless. Buds scaly, roundish pointed,
brown, shiny, not sticky. Leaves alternate, 1.5-3" (4-8 cm) long and about as wide, widest near the
base and quickly tapering to a point, the blades flat, hairless on both surfaces. Veins flat above and offset by
light color; there are 2 secondary veins from the base. Margins have small, rounded, wavy teeth and scattered
hair. Petioles 70-100% of blade length, vertically flattened, which makes the leaf shake in the slightest wind.
Flowers (late winter to early spring) in catkins, unshowy. Fruit a pointed capsule 6 mm long, opening in early
summer to release tiny parachuted seeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: White birch bark peels; aspen bark does not. Bigtooth aspen P. grandidentata has
larger teeth on its leaves and yellowish bark. Other poplars have rougher bark with the smooth part not as
white; the leaf shapes are different, and the petioles are not laterally flattened. None are poisonous. Chinese
tallow tree Triadica sebifera does not share the
distribution of quaking aspen but has smooth
bark and a remarkably similar leaf shape-how-
ever, the margins are entire and the sap is milky.
HABITAT: Young forests after disturbance by
fire, wind, or logging. In boreal regions it inhabits
better, well-drained soils of nearly any parent
material. Native.
FOOD USE: In early summer the cambium can
be harvested (p. 30). Sometimes it is bitter, but at
its best it is surprisingly sweet. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: In the not-so-olden days when
people peeled pulpwood logs by hand, woods
workers knew that an aspen cut at the right time
and peeled fresh could provide a slushy treat
sturped right off the spud. Harvesting cambium
weakens or kills the tree, so except in emergen-
cies it should be done only when they are being
cut for some other purpose. Clones of this tree
can live for tens of thousands of years.
120
BROADLEAF TREES; FRUIT SMALL 10 Quaking aspen 2 Populus tremuloides Salicaceae (Willow family) QUICK CHECK: White, powdery bark that does not peel; small broad leaves on vertically flattened petioles. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Tree spreading by root suckers to form large clones, trunks 50-80' m) tall with an open, narrow crown. Bark white, smooth, and powdery (sometimes of (15-25 on branches), becoming dark gray-black, blocky, and furrowed on lower parts green trunks. Branch bases are often black even where trunks are white. Twigs thin, brittle, reddish older brown and shiny in the first year, after that becoming grayer, dull, and hairless. Buds scaly, roundish pointed, brown, shiny, not sticky. Leaves alternate, 1.5-3" (4-8 cm) long and about as wide, widest near the base and quickly tapering to a point, the blades flat, hairless on both surfaces. Veins flat above and offset by light color; there are 2 secondary veins from the base. Margins have small, rounded, wavy teeth and scattered hair. Petioles 70-100% of blade length, vertically flattened, which makes the leaf shake in the slightest wind. Flowers (late winter to early spring) in catkins, unshowy. Fruit a pointed capsule 6 mm long, opening in early summer to release tiny parachuted seeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: White birch bark peels; aspen bark does not. Bigtooth aspen P. grandidentata has larger teeth on its leaves and yellowish bark. Other poplars have rougher bark with the smooth part not as white; the leaf shapes are different, and the petioles are not laterally flattened. None are poisonous. Chinese tallow tree Triadica sebifera does not share the distribution of quaking aspen but has smooth bark and a remarkably similar leaf shape-how- ever, the margins are entire and the sap is milky. HABITAT: Young forests after disturbance by fire, wind, or logging. In boreal regions it inhabits better, well-drained soils of nearly any parent material. Native. FOOD USE: In early summer the cambium can be harvested (p. 30). Sometimes it is bitter, but at its best it is surprisingly sweet. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: In the not-so-olden days when people peeled pulpwood logs by hand, woods workers knew that an aspen cut at the right time and peeled fresh could provide a slushy treat sturped right off the spud. Harvesting cambium weakens or kills the tree, so except in emergen- cies it should be done only when they are being cut for some other purpose. Clones of this tree can live for tens of thousands of years. 120 