MAPLE
IWE-187
genus Acer
family Sapindaceae
QUICK CHECK: Leaves in opposing pairs, palmately lobed or pinnately compound, bruit a
winged keys splitting apart at maturity. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: The species featured here are medium to large trees with rough furrowed or scaly bark
maturity. Leaves paired, on petioles 60-110% of blade length, the blades palmately lobed or pinnately com- at
pound. Flowers (early spring) primarily wind-pollinated, lacking petals, with a 5-lobed calyy that may be red,
yellow, or greenish. Fruit a pair of conjoined samaras (known as "keys"), borne at the end of a single pedicel,
splitting apart neatly at an abscission line, each with one soft seed and an asymmetrical, one-sided, propeller-
like wing 0.6-2.4" (1.5-6 cm) long.
FOOD USE: Sap can be used to make syrup, vinegar, or sugar. Drill holes about 1.2" (3 cm) into maple sapwood
in late winter when the days get warm enough for some thawing to occur (generally over 40 degrees F). In
warmer areas, you'll be waiting for a midwinter freeze, not a spring thaw. Drive in a wooden or metal spout
and hang a bucket or other container to collect dripping sap. Trees under 10" in diameter produce little. Sap
generally runs from the first thaws until just before the leaf buds open, but requires fluctuation between freez-
ing and thawing temperatures. Sap should be boiled down soon after collection to avoid spoilage. A typical
ratio for sugar/black maple is 38 gallons of sap for one gallon of syrup; other species are usually a little less
sweet. Boil until the syrup reaches 7° F above the boiling point. Filter while still hot, then reheat and bottle
the syrup. You can boil the syrup down further to make maple sugar.
CONFUSING PLANTS: The few other large trees in our region with palmately lobed leaves bear them alter-
nately. No other trees in our region have a double samara with asymmetrical wings.
COMMENTS: Most commercial production is from sugar/black and red maple respectively, but boxelder and
silver maple are also tapped commercially and are perfectly suitable for personal production.
IMPORTANT SPECIES: All are native:
15 Sugar maple
Acer saccharum
Here I am including three very similar trees sometimes separated from sugar maple: black
maple A. nigrum, southern sugar maple A. barbatum, and chalk maple A. leucoderme. These used
species are collectively called "hard maple" and the first two are the primary maples trees
to make Sugar maples are large, erect, single-trunked, long-lived, shade-tolerant and minor
with rugged syrup. and variable bark. The leaves are 4-6" (10-15 long with 3 major teeth on 2 some
the sinuses between lobes rounded at the base. There are a few large, blunt 1" cm)
lobes, of the lobes, but otherwise the leaf margins are smooth. The samaras are about northeastern (2.5
long and ripen in early autumn. Sugar maple dominates many forests in the
US and southeast
ern Canada. It pre-
fers well-drained
but moist, rich
soil, especially on
rocky slopes and
ridges or glacial
till. This tree is bad
for carbon emis-
sions because of
all the miles peo-
ple drive to seeits
brilliant yellow-or-
ange leaves
on autumn color
tours.
123
MAPLE IWE-187 genus Acer family Sapindaceae QUICK CHECK: Leaves in opposing pairs, palmately lobed or pinnately compound, bruit a winged keys splitting apart at maturity. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: The species featured here are medium to large trees with rough furrowed or scaly bark maturity. Leaves paired, on petioles 60-110% of blade length, the blades palmately lobed or pinnately com- at pound. Flowers (early spring) primarily wind-pollinated, lacking petals, with a 5-lobed calyy that may be red, yellow, or greenish. Fruit a pair of conjoined samaras (known as "keys"), borne at the end of a single pedicel, splitting apart neatly at an abscission line, each with one soft seed and an asymmetrical, one-sided, propeller- like wing 0.6-2.4" (1.5-6 cm) long. FOOD USE: Sap can be used to make syrup, vinegar, or sugar. Drill holes about 1.2" (3 cm) into maple sapwood in late winter when the days get warm enough for some thawing to occur (generally over 40 degrees F). In warmer areas, you'll be waiting for a midwinter freeze, not a spring thaw. Drive in a wooden or metal spout and hang a bucket or other container to collect dripping sap. Trees under 10" in diameter produce little. Sap generally runs from the first thaws until just before the leaf buds open, but requires fluctuation between freez- ing and thawing temperatures. Sap should be boiled down soon after collection to avoid spoilage. A typical ratio for sugar/black maple is 38 gallons of sap for one gallon of syrup; other species are usually a little less sweet. Boil until the syrup reaches 7° F above the boiling point. Filter while still hot, then reheat and bottle the syrup. You can boil the syrup down further to make maple sugar. CONFUSING PLANTS: The few other large trees in our region with palmately lobed leaves bear them alter- nately. No other trees in our region have a double samara with asymmetrical wings. COMMENTS: Most commercial production is from sugar/black and red maple respectively, but boxelder and silver maple are also tapped commercially and are perfectly suitable for personal production. IMPORTANT SPECIES: All are native: 15 Sugar maple Acer saccharum Here I am including three very similar trees sometimes separated from sugar maple: black maple A. nigrum, southern sugar maple A. barbatum, and chalk maple A. leucoderme. These used species are collectively called "hard maple" and the first two are the primary maples trees to make Sugar maples are large, erect, single-trunked, long-lived, shade-tolerant and minor with rugged syrup. and variable bark. The leaves are 4-6" (10-15 long with 3 major teeth on 2 some the sinuses between lobes rounded at the base. There are a few large, blunt 1" cm) lobes, of the lobes, but otherwise the leaf margins are smooth. The samaras are about northeastern (2.5 long and ripen in early autumn. Sugar maple dominates many forests in the US and southeast ern Canada. It pre- fers well-drained but moist, rich soil, especially on rocky slopes and ridges or glacial till. This tree is bad for carbon emis- sions because of all the miles peo- ple drive to seeits brilliant yellow-or- ange leaves on autumn color tours. 123 