BROADLEAF TREES: FRUIT SMALL AND DRY,
12 River birch
Betula
nigra
the
this 15 a tree of sandy floodplains that often grows in
clumps, the trunks typically leaning, sometimes very
The multicolored bark peels into irregular plates bark
large papery flakes, exposing lighter and smoother
beneath, or creating a combination of silvery, yellowish,
pinkish. rusty, and dark gray. The leaves are broad, very the
coarsely growth is also woolly. The seeds are released in spring, with I have bracts not
double-toothed, and finely woolly below;
shaped new like a bird foot. AKA water birch, red birch, black birch.
made syrup from this tree but two friends have done so.
Yellow
birch
Betula alleghaniensis
&
13
A long-lived forest dominant that may exceed 100'
(30 m) in height and 3' (1 m) in diameter. The bark
may peel in thin, papery shreds or large, thick plates; it
ranges from bright bronze-yellow to silvery, sometimes
with dark brown areas. The leaves are narrower than
those of white birch with more numerous and more
closely spaced secondary veins. The margins are more
evenly toothed and the petioles proportionately shorter.
The twigs and bark have a mild scent of wintergreen. Seeds fall in winter,
the bracts shaped like a bird foot. Yellow birch is found on rich, moist soil,
River birch
often associated with hemlock. AKA silver birch, B. lutea.
14 Sweet birch
Betula lenta
This birch has smooth, reddish-brown bark when
young, and dark scaly bark when older. In either form
it somewhat resembles cherry bark, and the leaves
show similarity as well-but cherries never have a
wintergreen odor. The leaves are narrower than those
of other birches--ovate to lanceolate-and have smaller
teeth. The twigs and bark have a strong wintergreen
odor the bark is the commercial source of natural wintergreen flavoring,
Seeds ripen III fall and the bracts look like a bird foot. It is found primarily
on rich, moist, rocky slopes. AKA cherry birch, black birch.
122
BROADLEAF TREES: FRUIT SMALL AND DRY, 12 River birch Betula nigra the this 15 a tree of sandy floodplains that often grows in clumps, the trunks typically leaning, sometimes very The multicolored bark peels into irregular plates bark large papery flakes, exposing lighter and smoother beneath, or creating a combination of silvery, yellowish, pinkish. rusty, and dark gray. The leaves are broad, very the coarsely growth is also woolly. The seeds are released in spring, with I have bracts not double-toothed, and finely woolly below; shaped new like a bird foot. AKA water birch, red birch, black birch. made syrup from this tree but two friends have done so. Yellow birch Betula alleghaniensis & 13 A long-lived forest dominant that may exceed 100' (30 m) in height and 3' (1 m) in diameter. The bark may peel in thin, papery shreds or large, thick plates; it ranges from bright bronze-yellow to silvery, sometimes with dark brown areas. The leaves are narrower than those of white birch with more numerous and more closely spaced secondary veins. The margins are more evenly toothed and the petioles proportionately shorter. The twigs and bark have a mild scent of wintergreen. Seeds fall in winter, the bracts shaped like a bird foot. Yellow birch is found on rich, moist soil, River birch often associated with hemlock. AKA silver birch, B. lutea. 14 Sweet birch Betula lenta This birch has smooth, reddish-brown bark when young, and dark scaly bark when older. In either form it somewhat resembles cherry bark, and the leaves show similarity as well-but cherries never have a wintergreen odor. The leaves are narrower than those of other birches--ovate to lanceolate-and have smaller teeth. The twigs and bark have a strong wintergreen odor the bark is the commercial source of natural wintergreen flavoring, Seeds ripen III fall and the bracts look like a bird foot. It is found primarily on rich, moist, rocky slopes. AKA cherry birch, black birch. 122 