OR
POD
19 Slippery elm
3
2
3
3
Ulmus rubra
Ulmaceae (Elm family)
QUICK when CHECK: Sandpapery-rough, toothed, alternate leaves falded along the midroir
growing in full sun; fruit a green papery disk. ID difficulty 2.
Description: Bark Medium-sized tree, tall and lanky in the woods but spreading
open. cut into the reddish-brown, peeling in narrow strips, sometimes loosening sideways. widely in the
outer bark, it will show alternating layers of reddish brown and darker If you
brown. Twigs medium thick, pubescent and green at first, becoming gray. Buds reddish blunt.
long, 4-6 mm, the with base several scales, the ends covered in rusty fuzz. Leaves alternate, ovate to elliptic,
narrow but rounded, the tip pointed, often acuminate, creased along the midvein 4-8" (10- in 20 cm)
sometimes dramatically. Surface hairy on both sides: sandpapery rough from stiff hairs above, full sun.
softer below. Midvein deeply depressed above. Secondary veins numerous, closely spaced, nearly the nairs
45°, deeply depressed above; veinlets also depressed. Margins double toothed. Petioles about 5% of straight. blade
length. Flowers (late winter or very early spring) small, unshowy, wind-pollinated. Fruit a disc-like samara
0.6-0.7" (15-18 mm) across, ripening as the leaves emerge; round to slightly oblong, green turning brown, the
wing hairless and ruffled, with a tiny notch in the end. Seed single,
flattened, in the samara center, the seed bulge hairy.
Confusing plants: American elm U. americana has smaller, smoother,
flatter leaves, more pointed and hairless buds, smaller and hairy-
winged samaras, and outer bark with whitish-gray layers.
Habitat: Hardwood forests with well-drained but rich soil, especially
limestone; mostly on slopes or high floodplains. Native.
Food use: Inner bark can be harvested all year; it contains much
embedded starch. Fresh or dried, the bark can be boiled to extract the
starch in a drinkable water solution that is pleasant lightly sweetened.
Dried bark can be ground in a blender and then sifted to remove the
fibers. This elm flour can be dissolved in water as a drink or mixed
with other flours for cooking. Cambium can be scraped off the wood
in spring or early summer (p. 30). Unripe samaras are excellent as
a salad green or cooked. Ripe seeds can be rubbed out of the dried
samaras and cooked like oatmeal.
Comments: Perhaps one of our strangest wild foods, slippery elm
bark flour is also one of the few that is commercially available. When
dried, slippery elm bark has a sweet odor remarkably like maple syrup.
AKA red elm. PS, I have no relationship to the company selling slip-
pery elm lozenges.
The sliced outer bark of
When sliced the outer
American elm has brown
bark of slippery elm
shows all brown layers.
and whitish-gray layers.
OR POD 19 Slippery elm 3 2 3 3 Ulmus rubra Ulmaceae (Elm family) QUICK when CHECK: Sandpapery-rough, toothed, alternate leaves falded along the midroir growing in full sun; fruit a green papery disk. ID difficulty 2. Description: Bark Medium-sized tree, tall and lanky in the woods but spreading open. cut into the reddish-brown, peeling in narrow strips, sometimes loosening sideways. widely in the outer bark, it will show alternating layers of reddish brown and darker If you brown. Twigs medium thick, pubescent and green at first, becoming gray. Buds reddish blunt. long, 4-6 mm, the with base several scales, the ends covered in rusty fuzz. Leaves alternate, ovate to elliptic, narrow but rounded, the tip pointed, often acuminate, creased along the midvein 4-8" (10- in 20 cm) sometimes dramatically. Surface hairy on both sides: sandpapery rough from stiff hairs above, full sun. softer below. Midvein deeply depressed above. Secondary veins numerous, closely spaced, nearly the nairs 45°, deeply depressed above; veinlets also depressed. Margins double toothed. Petioles about 5% of straight. blade length. Flowers (late winter or very early spring) small, unshowy, wind-pollinated. Fruit a disc-like samara 0.6-0.7" (15-18 mm) across, ripening as the leaves emerge; round to slightly oblong, green turning brown, the wing hairless and ruffled, with a tiny notch in the end. Seed single, flattened, in the samara center, the seed bulge hairy. Confusing plants: American elm U. americana has smaller, smoother, flatter leaves, more pointed and hairless buds, smaller and hairy- winged samaras, and outer bark with whitish-gray layers. Habitat: Hardwood forests with well-drained but rich soil, especially limestone; mostly on slopes or high floodplains. Native. Food use: Inner bark can be harvested all year; it contains much embedded starch. Fresh or dried, the bark can be boiled to extract the starch in a drinkable water solution that is pleasant lightly sweetened. Dried bark can be ground in a blender and then sifted to remove the fibers. This elm flour can be dissolved in water as a drink or mixed with other flours for cooking. Cambium can be scraped off the wood in spring or early summer (p. 30). Unripe samaras are excellent as a salad green or cooked. Ripe seeds can be rubbed out of the dried samaras and cooked like oatmeal. Comments: Perhaps one of our strangest wild foods, slippery elm bark flour is also one of the few that is commercially available. When dried, slippery elm bark has a sweet odor remarkably like maple syrup. AKA red elm. PS, I have no relationship to the company selling slip- pery elm lozenges. The sliced outer bark of When sliced the outer American elm has brown bark of slippery elm shows all brown layers. and whitish-gray layers. 