16 Red maple
Acer rubrum
called soft maple, this large, upright tree has smooth shaggy
Also when young that becomes furrowed, scaly, or winter
bark older. The trunks are often clumped, and the with
when are reddish. Leaves are 3-5" (8-13 cm) long maple
twigs major lobes, not as deeply cut as those of silver Female
3 but also with toothed margins and a gray underside.
flowers, although small, are bright red and showy in early
The samaras are about 1" (2.5 cm) long and ripen in
late spring. spring or early summer. Red maple grows in most forest types but tends on
to be most prevalent in slightly dry or slightly wet soils, and less prevalent abun-
mesic soils where sugar maple and beech dominate. It is increasing in
dance throughout much of our region. Red maples on rich soil produce almost
equally to sugar maples, although the minimum tapping size is somewhat larger.
17 Silver maple
Acer saccharinum
1
&
This is a large, spreading, fast-growing tree with
smooth gray bark when young, breaking into shaggy
strips when older. Trunks are often clumped. The
leaves are 3-6" (8-15 cm) long with 3-5 deeply cut
lobes and several shallower lobes, the margins with
sharp teeth. Blades are silvery on the underside. The
large samaras ripen in late spring and are about
2" (5 cm) long. While young and still tender in
spring, silver maple seeds can be peeled out of the samara and eaten
raw; when mature they should be boiled and drained. Other maples
have smaller, more bitter seeds. This tree's natural haunts are river
floodplains, where it sometimes forms extensive pure stands, but it
does well invading fields and is often planted as a yard tree.
18 Boxelder Acer negundo
This maple has leaning, crooked, often clumped trunks that can reach fairly large diam-
eters. The bark is light brown with shallow furrows; it never shags or peels. The leaves are
compound and have 3 or 5 leaflets, all stalked, each 3-4" (8-10 long with large teeth
or erratic small lobes. Twigs have smooth green bark coated with bloom. The samaras are
about 1.4 (3.5 cm) long, the seeds elongated and the keys acutely angled, forming in spring
but not ripening until fall and often persisting through winter. Boxelder's wild habitat
and river has floodplains but it colonizes disturbed ground in both urban and agricultural is
should not become be ignored one of our most common "weed" trees. Boxelder is commercially areas tapped in
are absent AKA ash-leaf by backyard maple, Manitoba sugarmakers, maple. especially since it is found on the Plains where Manitoba other maples and
124
16 Red maple Acer rubrum called soft maple, this large, upright tree has smooth shaggy Also when young that becomes furrowed, scaly, or winter bark older. The trunks are often clumped, and the with when are reddish. Leaves are 3-5" (8-13 cm) long maple twigs major lobes, not as deeply cut as those of silver Female 3 but also with toothed margins and a gray underside. flowers, although small, are bright red and showy in early The samaras are about 1" (2.5 cm) long and ripen in late spring. spring or early summer. Red maple grows in most forest types but tends on to be most prevalent in slightly dry or slightly wet soils, and less prevalent abun- mesic soils where sugar maple and beech dominate. It is increasing in dance throughout much of our region. Red maples on rich soil produce almost equally to sugar maples, although the minimum tapping size is somewhat larger. 17 Silver maple Acer saccharinum 1 & This is a large, spreading, fast-growing tree with smooth gray bark when young, breaking into shaggy strips when older. Trunks are often clumped. The leaves are 3-6" (8-15 cm) long with 3-5 deeply cut lobes and several shallower lobes, the margins with sharp teeth. Blades are silvery on the underside. The large samaras ripen in late spring and are about 2" (5 cm) long. While young and still tender in spring, silver maple seeds can be peeled out of the samara and eaten raw; when mature they should be boiled and drained. Other maples have smaller, more bitter seeds. This tree's natural haunts are river floodplains, where it sometimes forms extensive pure stands, but it does well invading fields and is often planted as a yard tree. 18 Boxelder Acer negundo This maple has leaning, crooked, often clumped trunks that can reach fairly large diam- eters. The bark is light brown with shallow furrows; it never shags or peels. The leaves are compound and have 3 or 5 leaflets, all stalked, each 3-4" (8-10 long with large teeth or erratic small lobes. Twigs have smooth green bark coated with bloom. The samaras are about 1.4 (3.5 cm) long, the seeds elongated and the keys acutely angled, forming in spring but not ripening until fall and often persisting through winter. Boxelder's wild habitat and river has floodplains but it colonizes disturbed ground in both urban and agricultural is should not become be ignored one of our most common "weed" trees. Boxelder is commercially areas tapped in are absent AKA ash-leaf by backyard maple, Manitoba sugarmakers, maple. especially since it is found on the Plains where Manitoba other maples and 124 