Icm
LOW OR VINES WITH LEATHERY, EVERGREEN LEAVES
9 LOW OR TRAILING SHRUBS OR VINES WITH LEATHERY, EVERGREEN LEAVES
The free-standing branches of these species never rise more than 12" cm),
and most of the time are much shorter-although they may creep horizon
tally for long distances. This life form is an adaptation to poor soil and
long, cold winters under the protection of snow, so most of the species
have a decidedly northern distribution. The arctic and alpine bearberries
are placed here even though their leaves are semi-deciduous because their
growth form otherwise matches the pattern of this group. All but one of the species
in this group are members of the heath family Ericaceae. The primary edible part of all but one is
fruit; one species is also commonly used for tea. This is a very safe group; 1 am aware of no plants species with this the
life form producing dangerous berries. Nevertheless, you still need to identify everything you eat!
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 9
The key is not your final answer!
leaves tiny, often whorled, the sides scrolled downward into a needle-like tube. Crowberries (p. 64).
leaves not rolled into a tube, entire or with a few tiny teeth, thick and leathery.
Fruit a dry, hairy, seed-filled capsule; some leaves over 2" (5 cm).
1. Trailing arbutus
Fruit fleshy, mealy, or juicy; leaves less than 2" (5 cm) long.
Stems limp, thread-like, 2 mm thick or less.
Leaves paired, red fruit with 2 depressions at the end.
2. Partridgeberry
Leaves alternate; white fruit on a short pedicel.
3. Creeping snowberry
or
Leaves alternate; reddish fruit on a long, thread-like pedicel.
Leaves blunt, margins slightly downturned.
4. Large cranberry
or
Leaves pointed, margins strongly scrolled downward.
5. Small cranberry
Some stems over 2 mm thick; leafy branches erect and rigid.
Fruit single with a large 5-point indent at the end.
7. Wintergreen
Fruit clustered, not indented at the end.
Seeds soft, leaves slightly creased along the midvein.
6. Lingonberry
8. Bearberry
Seeds hard, leaves not creased along the midvein.
flat, serrated, thin, the surface roughened above by deeply depressed veinlets.
9. Arctic bearberry
Fruit red.
10. Black bearberry
Fruit black.
Trailing arbutus
2
1
Ericaceae
(Heath
family)
Epigaea repens
QUICK CHECK: Blunt, leathery, ground-hugging leaves with heart-shaped bases, a
rough surface, and clusters of tubular, 5-lobed flowers. ID difficulty 1.
vine-like, 6-20" (15-50 cm) long, about 2 mm thick, creeping, visible. green New
DESCRIPTION: Stems under leaf litter, with only the ground-hugging leaves Leaves alter-
to reddish, often hidden old growth has prominent, erect, red-brown hairs. base, rounded
growth nate, 1.2-2,7" has white (3-7 hair; cm) long, leathery, elliptic to ovate with a heart-shaped indented at the tip, often with a tiny nipple. and is
or blade has long red-brown hairs below, hairs.
roughened The above by scattered, short. stiff above.
and veinlets are all deeply depressed secondary
Veins a rough texture. Midvein and are
rendering protrude below, but veinlets donot (they entire
veins depressed and darkened). Margins about 40%
faintly scattered long, stiff hairs. Petioles channel
with of blade length. hairy, with a very narrow
(Continued on the next page.)
127
Icm LOW OR VINES WITH LEATHERY, EVERGREEN LEAVES 9 LOW OR TRAILING SHRUBS OR VINES WITH LEATHERY, EVERGREEN LEAVES The free-standing branches of these species never rise more than 12" cm), and most of the time are much shorter-although they may creep horizon tally for long distances. This life form is an adaptation to poor soil and long, cold winters under the protection of snow, so most of the species have a decidedly northern distribution. The arctic and alpine bearberries are placed here even though their leaves are semi-deciduous because their growth form otherwise matches the pattern of this group. All but one of the species in this group are members of the heath family Ericaceae. The primary edible part of all but one is fruit; one species is also commonly used for tea. This is a very safe group; 1 am aware of no plants species with this the life form producing dangerous berries. Nevertheless, you still need to identify everything you eat! TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 9 The key is not your final answer! leaves tiny, often whorled, the sides scrolled downward into a needle-like tube. Crowberries (p. 64). leaves not rolled into a tube, entire or with a few tiny teeth, thick and leathery. Fruit a dry, hairy, seed-filled capsule; some leaves over 2" (5 cm). 1. Trailing arbutus Fruit fleshy, mealy, or juicy; leaves less than 2" (5 cm) long. Stems limp, thread-like, 2 mm thick or less. Leaves paired, red fruit with 2 depressions at the end. 2. Partridgeberry Leaves alternate; white fruit on a short pedicel. 3. Creeping snowberry or Leaves alternate; reddish fruit on a long, thread-like pedicel. Leaves blunt, margins slightly downturned. 4. Large cranberry or Leaves pointed, margins strongly scrolled downward. 5. Small cranberry Some stems over 2 mm thick; leafy branches erect and rigid. Fruit single with a large 5-point indent at the end. 7. Wintergreen Fruit clustered, not indented at the end. Seeds soft, leaves slightly creased along the midvein. 6. Lingonberry 8. Bearberry Seeds hard, leaves not creased along the midvein. flat, serrated, thin, the surface roughened above by deeply depressed veinlets. 9. Arctic bearberry Fruit red. 10. Black bearberry Fruit black. Trailing arbutus 2 1 Ericaceae (Heath family) Epigaea repens QUICK CHECK: Blunt, leathery, ground-hugging leaves with heart-shaped bases, a rough surface, and clusters of tubular, 5-lobed flowers. ID difficulty 1. vine-like, 6-20" (15-50 cm) long, about 2 mm thick, creeping, visible. green New DESCRIPTION: Stems under leaf litter, with only the ground-hugging leaves Leaves alter- to reddish, often hidden old growth has prominent, erect, red-brown hairs. base, rounded growth nate, 1.2-2,7" has white (3-7 hair; cm) long, leathery, elliptic to ovate with a heart-shaped indented at the tip, often with a tiny nipple. and is or blade has long red-brown hairs below, hairs. roughened The above by scattered, short. stiff above. and veinlets are all deeply depressed secondary Veins a rough texture. Midvein and are rendering protrude below, but veinlets donot (they entire veins depressed and darkened). Margins about 40% faintly scattered long, stiff hairs. Petioles channel with of blade length. hairy, with a very narrow (Continued on the next page.) 127 