BROADLEAF TREES: FRUIT SMALL AND DRY,
3
2
2
3
FH-165
20 Siberian elm
Ulmus pumila
introduced weedy tree has a crooked trunk blocky dark gray bark, and a spreading Leaves crown
This branches The twigs are more zigzag and winter buds are less fuzzy. folded; the
of silver much grav smaller. 1-3 (2.5-8 cm) long. ovate to lanceolate, and flat rather than those
are surface lacks the stiff sandpapery hairs. The samaras are slightly smaller than
of upper slipperv elm rounder, and the seed buige is not hairy. Siberian elm is often erroneously
called Chinese elm. but that species, Ulmus parvifolia, has leathery, semi-evergreen leaves
and lacv bark Siberian elm invades open, human-disturbed habitats in full sun: roadsides,
empty urban lots old fields. It is tolerant of heat, drought, and cold and thrives on the Great Plains where it
often forms nearly pure stands. All parts can be used like those of slippery elm. The samaras are smaller, but
also tend to be produced in larger quantities that are easier to reach. The two species readily hybridize, and
un some regions these hybrids are crowding out native slippery elm populations.
BROADLEAF TREES: FRUIT SMALL AND DRY, 3 2 2 3 FH-165 20 Siberian elm Ulmus pumila introduced weedy tree has a crooked trunk blocky dark gray bark, and a spreading Leaves crown This branches The twigs are more zigzag and winter buds are less fuzzy. folded; the of silver much grav smaller. 1-3 (2.5-8 cm) long. ovate to lanceolate, and flat rather than those are surface lacks the stiff sandpapery hairs. The samaras are slightly smaller than of upper slipperv elm rounder, and the seed buige is not hairy. Siberian elm is often erroneously called Chinese elm. but that species, Ulmus parvifolia, has leathery, semi-evergreen leaves and lacv bark Siberian elm invades open, human-disturbed habitats in full sun: roadsides, empty urban lots old fields. It is tolerant of heat, drought, and cold and thrives on the Great Plains where it often forms nearly pure stands. All parts can be used like those of slippery elm. The samaras are smaller, but also tend to be produced in larger quantities that are easier to reach. The two species readily hybridize, and un some regions these hybrids are crowding out native slippery elm populations. 