LOW OR TRAILING SHRUBS OR VINES WITH
Inflorescence 1 Trailing cearly tomid spring) as ompact mm long terminal abruptly clusters spreading of 3-15, at the and partly tip, a single to about fully pistil 13 hidden mm protrudes. wide, under with the The these 5 leaves. white calyx are
arbutus (continued)
Flower to is symmetric family has pink a tubuial al. trangular the sepals white lobes bract corolla long The one triangular throat smaller 10 and and than tube sharply the are other densely pointed, two. woolly, Fruit creamy a spherical, to very light hairy, green; 5-chambered behind capsule
HABITAT: ripening 2 hairv cupped. in late Dry summer sandy, pointed at and idic holding soil in full numerous to partial tiny sun, brown usually seeds. under some combination of pine, oak, and white
FOOD birch especially USE: The near part takes. caten Native. is the flower, A which reminds me of lilac but is less bitter with a nice persistent
COMMENTS: affertaste Conservation The flowers 1. make a fun snack or attractive garnish, and searching for them under dead leaves
in the drab woods of early spring is like a magical treasure hunt.
2
Partridgeberry
1
Mitchella repens
family
Rubiaceae
QUICK CHECK: Small, paired leaves with white midveins; 2-eyed red fruit with a white
interior. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Small. trailing evergreen, the wiry stems branching sparsely, to 20"
(50 cm) long, rooting at the nodes. Leaves paired, 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) long and as wide
or wider, broadly ovate to round, rounded at the tip and shallowly heart-shaped to rounded
at the base. the margins entire. Surface dark and hairless above, the midvein and sometimes
other major veins offset by pale color; veins essentially flat. Petioles 30-90% of blade length,
grooved, with 2 lines of fine hairs. Flowers (summer) borne in terminal pairs, each from a cup-like lobed calyx,
the corolia a tapered pink tube 8-11 mm long before spreading widely into 3-7 (most often 4) lobes, white
and very densely hairy on the inside. The sexual parts come in two separate arrangements, both arrangements
bisexua Berry ripens in late summer and persists through winter; bright red and waxy outside, white inside. It
IS actually two adjacent fruits grown together, and two depressed calyx lobes can be seen on the terminal end.
HABITAT: Forests in moderate shade. Widely tolerant; under conifers and hardwoods, from moist to dry soil
of nearly a! types Native.
FOOD USE: The berries are available almost
any THE there IS not snow on the ground. They
are 100 sparse to pick in quantity and have little
have but there is nevertheless some joy in any
JEWP like forest nibble Conservation: 1.
COMMENTS: Though rarely abundant, this
plan' airriost every forest type in our
region
LOW OR TRAILING SHRUBS OR VINES WITH Inflorescence 1 Trailing cearly tomid spring) as ompact mm long terminal abruptly clusters spreading of 3-15, at the and partly tip, a single to about fully pistil 13 hidden mm protrudes. wide, under with the The these 5 leaves. white calyx are arbutus (continued) Flower to is symmetric family has pink a tubuial al. trangular the sepals white lobes bract corolla long The one triangular throat smaller 10 and and than tube sharply the are other densely pointed, two. woolly, Fruit creamy a spherical, to very light hairy, green; 5-chambered behind capsule HABITAT: ripening 2 hairv cupped. in late Dry summer sandy, pointed at and idic holding soil in full numerous to partial tiny sun, brown usually seeds. under some combination of pine, oak, and white FOOD birch especially USE: The near part takes. caten Native. is the flower, A which reminds me of lilac but is less bitter with a nice persistent COMMENTS: affertaste Conservation The flowers 1. make a fun snack or attractive garnish, and searching for them under dead leaves in the drab woods of early spring is like a magical treasure hunt. 2 Partridgeberry 1 Mitchella repens family Rubiaceae QUICK CHECK: Small, paired leaves with white midveins; 2-eyed red fruit with a white interior. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Small. trailing evergreen, the wiry stems branching sparsely, to 20" (50 cm) long, rooting at the nodes. Leaves paired, 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) long and as wide or wider, broadly ovate to round, rounded at the tip and shallowly heart-shaped to rounded at the base. the margins entire. Surface dark and hairless above, the midvein and sometimes other major veins offset by pale color; veins essentially flat. Petioles 30-90% of blade length, grooved, with 2 lines of fine hairs. Flowers (summer) borne in terminal pairs, each from a cup-like lobed calyx, the corolia a tapered pink tube 8-11 mm long before spreading widely into 3-7 (most often 4) lobes, white and very densely hairy on the inside. The sexual parts come in two separate arrangements, both arrangements bisexua Berry ripens in late summer and persists through winter; bright red and waxy outside, white inside. It IS actually two adjacent fruits grown together, and two depressed calyx lobes can be seen on the terminal end. HABITAT: Forests in moderate shade. Widely tolerant; under conifers and hardwoods, from moist to dry soil of nearly a! types Native. FOOD USE: The berries are available almost any THE there IS not snow on the ground. They are 100 sparse to pick in quantity and have little have but there is nevertheless some joy in any JEWP like forest nibble Conservation: 1. COMMENTS: Though rarely abundant, this plan' airriost every forest type in our region 