LOW OR TRAILING SHRUBS OR VINES WITH LEATHERY, EVERGREEN LEAVES
3 Creeping snowberry
3
Gaultheria hispidula Ericaceae (Heath family)
QUICK CHECK: Tiny evergreen vine with white berries and wintergreen ador
ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Miniature creeping woody vine often forming mats over stumps, logs, or
rocks. Stems less than 1 mm thick and up to 16" (40 cm) long, prostrate, leafy for most of
their length, the leaves nearly touching to overlapped at the stem tip. Bark has appressed
brown hair when young; later shredding. Branches are few and scattered. Leaves tiny,
evergreen, alternate, broadly elliptic, blunt-pointed at both ends, 3-5 mm long, arched, the upper surface
shiny green and hairless, the lower surface pale with a few large, scale-like, appressed brown hairs. Midveins
and secondary veins are faintly depressed above. Margins entire and downcurved. Petioles 2-5% of blade
length. Flowers on short stalks from leaf axils in early summer; tiny, 4-lobed, white. Berry elliptic, white, 5-9
mm, growing on a thick, curved, green pedicel 15-20% of its length with 2 ovate bracts beneath the fruit. The
end is dimpled with a 4-lobed soft calyx and has a protruding style. The surface has scattered brown hairs
and the inside is juicy with small, soft seeds.
HABITAT: Bogs and mossy acidic uplands, generally under conifers in partial shade. Native.
FOOD USE: The small berries ripen in late summer; they are often hidden in the moss and hard to collect in
quantity. They can be eaten fresh and make delightful jams or desserts. They seem to fruit better on rocks
and logs than in bogs. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This berry is one of the most precious in all our flora: juicy and acid like a good wild strawberry,
but with a burst of crisp wintergreen. You won't often find enough to bring home, and you may not want to
share, but if you do it'll be memorable. AKA moxie plum.
LOW OR TRAILING SHRUBS OR VINES WITH LEATHERY, EVERGREEN LEAVES 3 Creeping snowberry 3 Gaultheria hispidula Ericaceae (Heath family) QUICK CHECK: Tiny evergreen vine with white berries and wintergreen ador ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Miniature creeping woody vine often forming mats over stumps, logs, or rocks. Stems less than 1 mm thick and up to 16" (40 cm) long, prostrate, leafy for most of their length, the leaves nearly touching to overlapped at the stem tip. Bark has appressed brown hair when young; later shredding. Branches are few and scattered. Leaves tiny, evergreen, alternate, broadly elliptic, blunt-pointed at both ends, 3-5 mm long, arched, the upper surface shiny green and hairless, the lower surface pale with a few large, scale-like, appressed brown hairs. Midveins and secondary veins are faintly depressed above. Margins entire and downcurved. Petioles 2-5% of blade length. Flowers on short stalks from leaf axils in early summer; tiny, 4-lobed, white. Berry elliptic, white, 5-9 mm, growing on a thick, curved, green pedicel 15-20% of its length with 2 ovate bracts beneath the fruit. The end is dimpled with a 4-lobed soft calyx and has a protruding style. The surface has scattered brown hairs and the inside is juicy with small, soft seeds. HABITAT: Bogs and mossy acidic uplands, generally under conifers in partial shade. Native. FOOD USE: The small berries ripen in late summer; they are often hidden in the moss and hard to collect in quantity. They can be eaten fresh and make delightful jams or desserts. They seem to fruit better on rocks and logs than in bogs. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This berry is one of the most precious in all our flora: juicy and acid like a good wild strawberry, but with a burst of crisp wintergreen. You won't often find enough to bring home, and you may not want to share, but if you do it'll be memorable. AKA moxie plum. 