LOW OR TRAILING SHRUBS OR VINES WITH
CRANBERRY NG-266 part) Ericaceae (Heath family)
QUICK genus CHECK: Vaccinium Tiny evergreen (in vines with small leaves and smooth, round stems to slightly rooting elongated at the nodes; cranber- elliptic where
ries. COMBINED ID difficulty DESCRIPTION: 1. Small, creeping, 10" (25 woody cm). Leaves vines with alternate, thin, petioles. wiry evergreen, Flowers 0.2-0.6" (early (Dodecatheon), (5-15 to midsummer) mm), with
growing to ovate, densely entire, they dark clusters may green of stand up above to erect 6, and each up pale to on a beneath, long, thin cluster pedicel, on very of nodding short stamens like that a shooting has been star on fancied a thread-like to resemble pedicel a
single long, or pink, in loose reflexed petais behind a tight spherical protruding to elliptic, 0.3-0.9" (8-23 mm) long, and cream.
with crane's 4 2 tiny beak bracts, (hence PLANTS: ripening crane-berry). Lingonberry in fall to Berry red V. or vitis-idaea a mottled has mixture thicker, hairs of and stiffer, red, a wintergreen light shorter green, stems, smell. blunter leaves, and fruit
CONFUSING Creeping snowberry vines have brown Native.
HABITAT: Sunny Gather ripe fruit from the moss by hand; if the vines stand erect after freezing you can and use thawing) a rake. Use have like a
in tight clusters. bogs with sphagnum moss, with or without standing water.
FOOD USE: Soft but unspoiled "bletted" berries (this happens Conservation 1.
cultivated cranberries. cannot get from store-bought cranberries.
different flavor Cranberries that you are more abundant than many people realize, because New Jersey, people and rarely the Great venture Lakes into
COMMENTS: artificial bogs in New England, of fruit. We
bogs. region. Large Most cranberries cultivars are are selected cultivated directly in from wild plants, which can still provide huge crops
have two species:
3
4 Large cranberry Vaccinium macrocarpon
This species has
larger leaves than
small cranberry,
almost flat (the
margins scarcely
downcurved) and
the tips rounded.
The vines are longer and more likely
to climb other vegetation or stand erect.
The fruit averages larger, 0.4-0.9" (10-
23 mm) and may be spherical or elon-
gated. The bracts on the pedicel are
close to the fruit. Large cranberry grows
further south than small cranberry and
inhabits wet, floating bogs or the boggy margins of open water-although it can tolerate dry conditions. It is
usually much faster to collect.
5 Small cranberry Vaccinium oxycoccus
3
This has slightly smaller fruit
(5-13 mm) that is usually spherl-
cal and often paler when ripe, The
2 bracts are close to the middle
of the pedicel. The leaves, like
everything else, average smaller:
7-10 mm. They are more silvery
beneath, have pointed tips, and the margins are strongly
down-curved. Small cranberry grows in floating bogs
or muskegs that may be seasonally dry. The flavor is
perhaps superior, but the berries take longer to collect.
130
LOW OR TRAILING SHRUBS OR VINES WITH CRANBERRY NG-266 part) Ericaceae (Heath family) QUICK genus CHECK: Vaccinium Tiny evergreen (in vines with small leaves and smooth, round stems to slightly rooting elongated at the nodes; cranber- elliptic where ries. COMBINED ID difficulty DESCRIPTION: 1. Small, creeping, 10" (25 woody cm). Leaves vines with alternate, thin, petioles. wiry evergreen, Flowers 0.2-0.6" (early (Dodecatheon), (5-15 to midsummer) mm), with growing to ovate, densely entire, they dark clusters may green of stand up above to erect 6, and each up pale to on a beneath, long, thin cluster pedicel, on very of nodding short stamens like that a shooting has been star on fancied a thread-like to resemble pedicel a single long, or pink, in loose reflexed petais behind a tight spherical protruding to elliptic, 0.3-0.9" (8-23 mm) long, and cream. with crane's 4 2 tiny beak bracts, (hence PLANTS: ripening crane-berry). Lingonberry in fall to Berry red V. or vitis-idaea a mottled has mixture thicker, hairs of and stiffer, red, a wintergreen light shorter green, stems, smell. blunter leaves, and fruit CONFUSING Creeping snowberry vines have brown Native. HABITAT: Sunny Gather ripe fruit from the moss by hand; if the vines stand erect after freezing you can and use thawing) a rake. Use have like a in tight clusters. bogs with sphagnum moss, with or without standing water. FOOD USE: Soft but unspoiled "bletted" berries (this happens Conservation 1. cultivated cranberries. cannot get from store-bought cranberries. different flavor Cranberries that you are more abundant than many people realize, because New Jersey, people and rarely the Great venture Lakes into COMMENTS: artificial bogs in New England, of fruit. We bogs. region. Large Most cranberries cultivars are are selected cultivated directly in from wild plants, which can still provide huge crops have two species: 3 4 Large cranberry Vaccinium macrocarpon This species has larger leaves than small cranberry, almost flat (the margins scarcely downcurved) and the tips rounded. The vines are longer and more likely to climb other vegetation or stand erect. The fruit averages larger, 0.4-0.9" (10- 23 mm) and may be spherical or elon- gated. The bracts on the pedicel are close to the fruit. Large cranberry grows further south than small cranberry and inhabits wet, floating bogs or the boggy margins of open water-although it can tolerate dry conditions. It is usually much faster to collect. 5 Small cranberry Vaccinium oxycoccus 3 This has slightly smaller fruit (5-13 mm) that is usually spherl- cal and often paler when ripe, The 2 bracts are close to the middle of the pedicel. The leaves, like everything else, average smaller: 7-10 mm. They are more silvery beneath, have pointed tips, and the margins are strongly down-curved. Small cranberry grows in floating bogs or muskegs that may be seasonally dry. The flavor is perhaps superior, but the berries take longer to collect. 130 