Icm LOW OR TRAILING SHRUBS OR VINES WITH LEATHERY, EVERGREEN LEAVES
6 Lingonberry
3
NG-266
Vaccinium vitis-idaea
Ericaceae (Heath family)
QUICK CHECK: Erect mini-shrub with tiny, evergreen, spoon shaped
of spherical red berries. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Low, trailing, mat-forming mini-shrub, the erect branches to 6
tall. Stems branching, at first with curly white hairs, older stems becoming dark brown (15 cm)
black and peeling. Leaves 0.2-0,8" (5-20 mm) long, evergreen, leathery, alternate, oval to
to elliptic, the tips rounded or indented, the base tapered. The surface is dark, glossy,
and hairless above; paler below with black dots. Midvein depressed above and the blade slightly creased
other veins are faint. Margins entire and rolled downward, hairy near the leaf base. Petioles hair
of blade length. Inflorescence a one-sided terminal raceme of up to 10, each pedicel with 2 tiny oracis Flow-
ers (summer) white to light pink, the calyx bell-like with four lobes, the style protruding beyond the spening
Berries spherical, 8-10 mm, dark red, with a visible end calyx, containing several soft seeds They
late summer but often persist through the winter.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Bearberry Arctostaphylos uva-ursi has larger leaves and the midvein is only fainty
depressed. Its fruits are larger and dry inside with hard seeds and a calyx at the base.
HABITAT: Full sun. Open rocky slopes, alpine meadows, tundra, bog edges. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather ripe berries by hand or with a berry rake beginning in late summer, continu 1.1 unt
snow cover and sometimes again the following spring. They are most often canned with sugar and eaten like
cranberry sauce. They do not need additional pectin to thicken. They can also be used for juice, in breads or
any other way you'd use cranberries. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Lingonberries are circumboreal in distribution and are abundant in Scandinavia, where they
are still commonly eaten. Canned wild lingonberries of several brands are imported to North America from
Sweden and are available in most grocery stores. This is one of the most abundant wild berries of northern
Canada and Alaska. AKA cowberry, partridgeberry, lowbush cranberry.
Icm LOW OR TRAILING SHRUBS OR VINES WITH LEATHERY, EVERGREEN LEAVES 6 Lingonberry 3 NG-266 Vaccinium vitis-idaea Ericaceae (Heath family) QUICK CHECK: Erect mini-shrub with tiny, evergreen, spoon shaped of spherical red berries. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Low, trailing, mat-forming mini-shrub, the erect branches to 6 tall. Stems branching, at first with curly white hairs, older stems becoming dark brown (15 cm) black and peeling. Leaves 0.2-0,8" (5-20 mm) long, evergreen, leathery, alternate, oval to to elliptic, the tips rounded or indented, the base tapered. The surface is dark, glossy, and hairless above; paler below with black dots. Midvein depressed above and the blade slightly creased other veins are faint. Margins entire and rolled downward, hairy near the leaf base. Petioles hair of blade length. Inflorescence a one-sided terminal raceme of up to 10, each pedicel with 2 tiny oracis Flow- ers (summer) white to light pink, the calyx bell-like with four lobes, the style protruding beyond the spening Berries spherical, 8-10 mm, dark red, with a visible end calyx, containing several soft seeds They late summer but often persist through the winter. CONFUSING PLANTS: Bearberry Arctostaphylos uva-ursi has larger leaves and the midvein is only fainty depressed. Its fruits are larger and dry inside with hard seeds and a calyx at the base. HABITAT: Full sun. Open rocky slopes, alpine meadows, tundra, bog edges. Native. FOOD USE: Gather ripe berries by hand or with a berry rake beginning in late summer, continu 1.1 unt snow cover and sometimes again the following spring. They are most often canned with sugar and eaten like cranberry sauce. They do not need additional pectin to thicken. They can also be used for juice, in breads or any other way you'd use cranberries. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Lingonberries are circumboreal in distribution and are abundant in Scandinavia, where they are still commonly eaten. Canned wild lingonberries of several brands are imported to North America from Sweden and are available in most grocery stores. This is one of the most abundant wild berries of northern Canada and Alaska. AKA cowberry, partridgeberry, lowbush cranberry. 