Wintergreen
2
7
(Heath
family)
Gaultheria procumbens
Ericaceae
CHECK: Tiny evergreen shrub , 7" (5 18 cm) tall with broad leaves, waxy pink
berries QUICK with a depressed end, and a wintergreen odor. ID difficulty 1.
small shrub in colonies that spread by rhizome. Stems erect, crowded 2-7"
DESCRIPTION: tall. red Very and minutely downy at the top, each bearing 3-7 alternate leaves 0.8-1,7"
neal (5-18 the top. Leaves evergreen, tough and leathery, broadly elliptic to nearly round, or
(2-4.3 cin) long, rounded to blunt-pointed at the tip and angled at the base, dark green flat
to red etched. Margins are slightly down-curved. nearly entire but with tiny, widely-spaced teeth, each with a bristle axils
tinted and glossy above, pale green below, hairless on both sides. Major veins are
hugging the margin. Petiole downy, 5-10% of blade length. Flowers single, on nodding pedicels from leaf
in mid to late summer, with a small 5-lobed calyx and a white, barrel-shaped corolla that is constricted at the
tip with 5 recurved lobes. Berries 1-5 per plant, hanging beneath the leaves, spherical to slightly elongated,
bright red, with a 5-pointed star depressed into the end and a persistent style. The flesh is white and spongy,
not juicy. with a dry chamber inside containing numerous light brown seeds, maturing in late summer to early
autumn but overwintering-they seem to reach their best size and development late the following spring.
HABITAT: Dry or well-drained northern forests with acidic soil, especially under mixtures of birch, oak, and
pine. Most common in sandy soil in sunny areas at forest edges. Native.
FOOD USE: Berries are a pleasant nibble, good in desserts or smoothies raw. Do not eat a large quantity.
Leaves can be collected at any time and nibbled for their wintergreen flavor, and they can be used to brew a
surprisingly weak tea. A flavoring can be extracted with alcohol.
COMMENTS: This well-known and much loved Northwoods plant is dear to many, although it is more of a
flavoring than a food. The year-round availability is appreciated. AKA teaberry.
Wintergreen 2 7 (Heath family) Gaultheria procumbens Ericaceae CHECK: Tiny evergreen shrub , 7" (5 18 cm) tall with broad leaves, waxy pink berries QUICK with a depressed end, and a wintergreen odor. ID difficulty 1. small shrub in colonies that spread by rhizome. Stems erect, crowded 2-7" DESCRIPTION: tall. red Very and minutely downy at the top, each bearing 3-7 alternate leaves 0.8-1,7" neal (5-18 the top. Leaves evergreen, tough and leathery, broadly elliptic to nearly round, or (2-4.3 cin) long, rounded to blunt-pointed at the tip and angled at the base, dark green flat to red etched. Margins are slightly down-curved. nearly entire but with tiny, widely-spaced teeth, each with a bristle axils tinted and glossy above, pale green below, hairless on both sides. Major veins are hugging the margin. Petiole downy, 5-10% of blade length. Flowers single, on nodding pedicels from leaf in mid to late summer, with a small 5-lobed calyx and a white, barrel-shaped corolla that is constricted at the tip with 5 recurved lobes. Berries 1-5 per plant, hanging beneath the leaves, spherical to slightly elongated, bright red, with a 5-pointed star depressed into the end and a persistent style. The flesh is white and spongy, not juicy. with a dry chamber inside containing numerous light brown seeds, maturing in late summer to early autumn but overwintering-they seem to reach their best size and development late the following spring. HABITAT: Dry or well-drained northern forests with acidic soil, especially under mixtures of birch, oak, and pine. Most common in sandy soil in sunny areas at forest edges. Native. FOOD USE: Berries are a pleasant nibble, good in desserts or smoothies raw. Do not eat a large quantity. Leaves can be collected at any time and nibbled for their wintergreen flavor, and they can be used to brew a surprisingly weak tea. A flavoring can be extracted with alcohol. COMMENTS: This well-known and much loved Northwoods plant is dear to many, although it is more of a flavoring than a food. The year-round availability is appreciated. AKA teaberry. 