1cm LOW OR TRAILING SHRUBS OR VINES WITH LEATHERY, EVERGREEN LEAVES
8 Bearberry
1
Arctastaphylos
uva-ursi
Ericaceae
(Heath
family)
QUICK on a short, CHECK: thick Short erect branches and spoon shaped leaves. round, red. meal
pedicel. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: numerous erect Trailing stem lying flat on the ground, often hidden by litter,
brown and branches to 6" (15 cm), forming a dense mat. New branches sending up
(13-25 mm) long, oblong to obovate with rounded tips and a tapered base, the leaf 0.5 1"
finely hairy; older branches have peeling papery skin. Leaves alternate, are rusty
arching. the midvein, Blades with are the leathery, hairless and semi-glossy above, paler and faintly hairy often below, not
of blade veins only faintly depressed. Margins entire, curled down and hairy. Petioles creased along
a length, often appressed to the stem. Inflorescence a compact terminal drooping cluster of 10 15%
triangular bract at the base of each pedicel. Flowers (late spring) 5-7 mm long, on very short 37 with
hanging like an overturned vase, broadest at the whitish base and tapering to a pinkish opening with pedicels,
lobes. Berries in small clusters, spherical, 7-12 mm, with a tiny 5-lobed calyx pressed to the base, the 5 fiesh tiny
whitish, nearly dry, mealy, containing up to 5 hard seeds. They ripen to red at the end of summer but ofter
persist through winter.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Lingonberries have smaller leaves, smaller fruits lacking hard seeds, and leaves
slightly creased on the midvein.
HABITAT: Sunny sites on the poorest dry soil: pine barrens, rocky ridges, tundra, steep slopes, sand dunes
Native.
FOOD USE: Berries ripen in late summer and are typically available through the following spring. You can
eat them raw or cooked, but they are hardly good in either case. The flavor is supposedly better after hard
frosts. Due to the astringency, large quantities can cause stomach upset. The Iñupiat of Alaska eat them
preserved in animal fat, which is said to soften and sweeten the berries while lending a good flavor to the fat.
Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: In some places these can
be gathered in great quantities. While
they are well-known among northern
edibles, they are not highly esteemed
The leaves are used to make an infusion
to fight urinary tract infections. (Consult
a health care provider for details.)
133
1cm LOW OR TRAILING SHRUBS OR VINES WITH LEATHERY, EVERGREEN LEAVES 8 Bearberry 1 Arctastaphylos uva-ursi Ericaceae (Heath family) QUICK on a short, CHECK: thick Short erect branches and spoon shaped leaves. round, red. meal pedicel. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: numerous erect Trailing stem lying flat on the ground, often hidden by litter, brown and branches to 6" (15 cm), forming a dense mat. New branches sending up (13-25 mm) long, oblong to obovate with rounded tips and a tapered base, the leaf 0.5 1" finely hairy; older branches have peeling papery skin. Leaves alternate, are rusty arching. the midvein, Blades with are the leathery, hairless and semi-glossy above, paler and faintly hairy often below, not of blade veins only faintly depressed. Margins entire, curled down and hairy. Petioles creased along a length, often appressed to the stem. Inflorescence a compact terminal drooping cluster of 10 15% triangular bract at the base of each pedicel. Flowers (late spring) 5-7 mm long, on very short 37 with hanging like an overturned vase, broadest at the whitish base and tapering to a pinkish opening with pedicels, lobes. Berries in small clusters, spherical, 7-12 mm, with a tiny 5-lobed calyx pressed to the base, the 5 fiesh tiny whitish, nearly dry, mealy, containing up to 5 hard seeds. They ripen to red at the end of summer but ofter persist through winter. CONFUSING PLANTS: Lingonberries have smaller leaves, smaller fruits lacking hard seeds, and leaves slightly creased on the midvein. HABITAT: Sunny sites on the poorest dry soil: pine barrens, rocky ridges, tundra, steep slopes, sand dunes Native. FOOD USE: Berries ripen in late summer and are typically available through the following spring. You can eat them raw or cooked, but they are hardly good in either case. The flavor is supposedly better after hard frosts. Due to the astringency, large quantities can cause stomach upset. The Iñupiat of Alaska eat them preserved in animal fat, which is said to soften and sweeten the berries while lending a good flavor to the fat. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: In some places these can be gathered in great quantities. While they are well-known among northern edibles, they are not highly esteemed The leaves are used to make an infusion to fight urinary tract infections. (Consult a health care provider for details.) 133 