nm
1cm
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES
GROUP 10 BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH
ORANGE TO RED BERRIES
The few plants also in provide this group represent a variety of families. All but berries;
a with red berries will edible greens, flowers, or teas. Some of one our have edible
Likewise, key here if they begin fruiting at an smaller trees
Berries unusually defined large specimens of some of these shrubs unusually small size.
in the greatest are dimension. here as edible fleshy or juicy fruits less may than key 0.8" as (2 trees. cm)
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 10
The key is not your final answer!
Leaves in opposing pairs.
or
Leaf compound, leaflets toothed.
Leaf simple, entire.
1. Red elderberry
Berries paired, pressed together, with multiple seeds. Honeysuckle (not edible, p. 657).
or
Berries single or in clusters of up to 7, seeds single.
or
Bush thorny, leaves 3-4 x longer than wide, secondary veins obscure.
Bush thornless, leaves less than twice as long as wide, secondary veins evident
2. Silver buffaloberry
and depressed.
Leaf simple, palmately lobed and toothed.
3. Canada buffaloberry
Shrub over 8' (2.4 m) tall, berry clusters over 3" (8 cm) across, terminal leaves lobed.
5. Highbush cranberry
Shrub under 6' (2 m) tall, berry clusters less than 2" (5 cm) across, terminal leaves not lobed.
6. Squashberry
Leaves
alternate.
Leaves compound.
Pinnately compound with 5-9 serrated leaflets.
or
7. Roses
Ternately compound, leaves stiff and evergreen with sharp points.
S. Agarita
Leaves simple.
Leaf margins smooth with no lobes or teeth.
Berry with multiple seeds.
Berry with an expanded pedicel and a 3-5-part calyx at the base.
Leaves thin and deciduous; inland.
9. Goji berry
or
Leaves semi-evergreen and succulent; coastal.
10. Christmas berry
or
Berry without a 5-part calyx at the base.
12. Japanese barberry
Berry with a single seed.
Berry covered with silvery scales, seed ridged, pointed at both ends.
4. Autumnberry
Berry smooth and shiny; seed smooth with blunt ends.
13. Spicebush
Leaves palmately lobed, margins toothed.
14. Red currant
Berries smooth and hairless, on a drooping raceme.
or
15. Skunk currant
Berries in an erect raceme, covered with musky gland-tipped hairs.
Leaves not lobed, margins toothed.
Stems trailing along the ground in tundra. Arctic bearberry (p. 134).
Stems standing upright.
16. Red aronia
Berries in flat-topped clusters of 12-40.
Berries in small umbels from twigs on long Individual stems. Pin cherry (p. 102).
11. European barberry
Berries in drooping racemes; stems with 3-part thorns.
Berries single or in very short-stalked clusters from twigs.
17. Yaupon (berries not edible)
Leaves less than 1.5" (4 cm), tough, evergreen.
Leaves mostly over 2" (5 cm), thin, deciduous. Winterberry (not edible).
135
nm 1cm BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES GROUP 10 BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES The few plants also in provide this group represent a variety of families. All but berries; a with red berries will edible greens, flowers, or teas. Some of one our have edible Likewise, key here if they begin fruiting at an smaller trees Berries unusually defined large specimens of some of these shrubs unusually small size. in the greatest are dimension. here as edible fleshy or juicy fruits less may than key 0.8" as (2 trees. cm) TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 10 The key is not your final answer! Leaves in opposing pairs. or Leaf compound, leaflets toothed. Leaf simple, entire. 1. Red elderberry Berries paired, pressed together, with multiple seeds. Honeysuckle (not edible, p. 657). or Berries single or in clusters of up to 7, seeds single. or Bush thorny, leaves 3-4 x longer than wide, secondary veins obscure. Bush thornless, leaves less than twice as long as wide, secondary veins evident 2. Silver buffaloberry and depressed. Leaf simple, palmately lobed and toothed. 3. Canada buffaloberry Shrub over 8' (2.4 m) tall, berry clusters over 3" (8 cm) across, terminal leaves lobed. 5. Highbush cranberry Shrub under 6' (2 m) tall, berry clusters less than 2" (5 cm) across, terminal leaves not lobed. 6. Squashberry Leaves alternate. Leaves compound. Pinnately compound with 5-9 serrated leaflets. or 7. Roses Ternately compound, leaves stiff and evergreen with sharp points. S. Agarita Leaves simple. Leaf margins smooth with no lobes or teeth. Berry with multiple seeds. Berry with an expanded pedicel and a 3-5-part calyx at the base. Leaves thin and deciduous; inland. 9. Goji berry or Leaves semi-evergreen and succulent; coastal. 10. Christmas berry or Berry without a 5-part calyx at the base. 12. Japanese barberry Berry with a single seed. Berry covered with silvery scales, seed ridged, pointed at both ends. 4. Autumnberry Berry smooth and shiny; seed smooth with blunt ends. 13. Spicebush Leaves palmately lobed, margins toothed. 14. Red currant Berries smooth and hairless, on a drooping raceme. or 15. Skunk currant Berries in an erect raceme, covered with musky gland-tipped hairs. Leaves not lobed, margins toothed. Stems trailing along the ground in tundra. Arctic bearberry (p. 134). Stems standing upright. 16. Red aronia Berries in flat-topped clusters of 12-40. Berries in small umbels from twigs on long Individual stems. Pin cherry (p. 102). 11. European barberry Berries in drooping racemes; stems with 3-part thorns. Berries single or in very short-stalked clusters from twigs. 17. Yaupon (berries not edible) Leaves less than 1.5" (4 cm), tough, evergreen. Leaves mostly over 2" (5 cm), thin, deciduous. Winterberry (not edible). 135 