9
Arctic bearberry rubra Ericaceae 1 (Heath family)
Arctous CHECK: Trailing tundra shrub with difficulty deeply depressed 1. leaf veins and bright red, the
translucent. QUICK soft, Trailing juicy, spherical vine with fruit. stems ID resting directly and 5 mm on the thick, ground, but the although thicker visible. por-
tions tips DESCRIPTION: may are be usually raised covered slightly. broad with Stems angles, litter, to leaving 2' bearing (60 cm) little leaves long more only than in the the layer leafy terminal turns branch 3-5" black, tips (8-13 rotting cm). as it sloughs with off. New fine,
Bark Branches numerous, shredding at papery layer-on older stems this Buds large, about 5 mm, red, (turning pointed, bright red in
fall. spoon-shaped dying but remaining with a attached blunt tip, tapered to the base, hairless, and deeply sometimes depressed above to create a rough of texture. blade are
twigs soft hairs brown are light on with the brown, a scale made margins. angular Leaves into by winter, alternate, papery but bark most tardily ridges. eventually deciduous dropping). to semi-evergreen with 1-1.6" a (2.5-4 reddish cm) cast. long, Blades obovate
flat or and thin, evenly the toothed, margins the not teeth downturned. blunt and Veins pointing net-like distally. small Petiole clusters flat and of up red. to channeled. 3 on short pedicels 20-30% with in a early tiny
Margins summer. length, gently Flowers tapering urn-shaped, into the 4-5 leaf semi-translucent, mm base. long, Inflorescence 5-lobed, and white dull to red: pink. the Berries inside spherical. very juicy 6-10 with 5 mm, seeds. Ripens
calyx
underneath.
The
skin
is
thin.
in mid to late summer.
HABITAT: Tundra, especially where rocky
or gravelly, but occasionally in bogs. Native.
FOOD USE: The red berries usually rest
directly on the ground. Their flavor is not
particularly sweet nor sour, but the texture is
pleasant and juicy. like to suck on them while
chewing gently and then spit out the seeds,
but don't think they'd make great pie or jelly.
COMMENTS: This fruit and the next species
were traditionally eaten as last resorts, mixed
with other berries to extend the food supply. A
few botänists lump these two Arctous species
together, but if you collect them they sure look,
feel. and taste like different plants. AKA red
alpine bearberry, Arctostaphylos rubra.
Reloted edible:
10 Black bearberry Arctous alpina
This is very similar to the red arctic bearberry, but it is characteristic of dry tundra and rock
outcroppings at slightly higher elevations. The leaves are somewhat smaller on average,
with long hairs on the margins, especially near the base. The blades are somewhat narrower,
more gently tapered into the
petiole, less rounded at the
tip, thicker and more deeply
depressed by veinlets, which
are distinctly darkened on the underside, forming
a net-like pattern. The leaves are somewhere
between deciduous and evergreen-they die
in winter but remain attached, disintegrating in
place The fruit is slightly larger, ripens to black,
and is less juicy than arctic bearberry. The fla-
vor IS boring, with a faint unpleasant aftertaste.
AKA alpine bearberry, Arctostaphylos alpina.
134
9 Arctic bearberry rubra Ericaceae 1 (Heath family) Arctous CHECK: Trailing tundra shrub with difficulty deeply depressed 1. leaf veins and bright red, the translucent. QUICK soft, Trailing juicy, spherical vine with fruit. stems ID resting directly and 5 mm on the thick, ground, but the although thicker visible. por- tions tips DESCRIPTION: may are be usually raised covered slightly. broad with Stems angles, litter, to leaving 2' bearing (60 cm) little leaves long more only than in the the layer leafy terminal turns branch 3-5" black, tips (8-13 rotting cm). as it sloughs with off. New fine, Bark Branches numerous, shredding at papery layer-on older stems this Buds large, about 5 mm, red, (turning pointed, bright red in fall. spoon-shaped dying but remaining with a attached blunt tip, tapered to the base, hairless, and deeply sometimes depressed above to create a rough of texture. blade are twigs soft hairs brown are light on with the brown, a scale made margins. angular Leaves into by winter, alternate, papery but bark most tardily ridges. eventually deciduous dropping). to semi-evergreen with 1-1.6" a (2.5-4 reddish cm) cast. long, Blades obovate flat or and thin, evenly the toothed, margins the not teeth downturned. blunt and Veins pointing net-like distally. small Petiole clusters flat and of up red. to channeled. 3 on short pedicels 20-30% with in a early tiny Margins summer. length, gently Flowers tapering urn-shaped, into the 4-5 leaf semi-translucent, mm base. long, Inflorescence 5-lobed, and white dull to red: pink. the Berries inside spherical. very juicy 6-10 with 5 mm, seeds. Ripens calyx underneath. The skin is thin. in mid to late summer. HABITAT: Tundra, especially where rocky or gravelly, but occasionally in bogs. Native. FOOD USE: The red berries usually rest directly on the ground. Their flavor is not particularly sweet nor sour, but the texture is pleasant and juicy. like to suck on them while chewing gently and then spit out the seeds, but don't think they'd make great pie or jelly. COMMENTS: This fruit and the next species were traditionally eaten as last resorts, mixed with other berries to extend the food supply. A few botänists lump these two Arctous species together, but if you collect them they sure look, feel. and taste like different plants. AKA red alpine bearberry, Arctostaphylos rubra. Reloted edible: 10 Black bearberry Arctous alpina This is very similar to the red arctic bearberry, but it is characteristic of dry tundra and rock outcroppings at slightly higher elevations. The leaves are somewhat smaller on average, with long hairs on the margins, especially near the base. The blades are somewhat narrower, more gently tapered into the petiole, less rounded at the tip, thicker and more deeply depressed by veinlets, which are distinctly darkened on the underside, forming a net-like pattern. The leaves are somewhere between deciduous and evergreen-they die in winter but remain attached, disintegrating in place The fruit is slightly larger, ripens to black, and is less juicy than arctic bearberry. The fla- vor IS boring, with a faint unpleasant aftertaste. AKA alpine bearberry, Arctostaphylos alpina. 134 