0
1cm
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES
2 Silver buffaloberry
2
Shepherdia argentea
family Elaeagnaceae
QUICK flowers, CHECK: and Thorny shrub with narrow, blunt tipped, silvery, antire
small, orange-red, single-seeded berries. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: (1.5-4 m) tall, the Erect, densely-branched shrub forming colonies by rhizome,
trunks. Short stems to 2" (5 cm) thick. Bark gray, exfoliating in long strips 5.13
which spur-branches terminate in sharp thorns. Twigs covered in silvery on larger
are eventually shed on older branches. Leaves paired, 1.5-2,5" (3,8-6.4 cm) scales,
narrowly blades elliptic be to oblanceolate with rounded tips and tapered bases, tough and leathery long, but
is dull may cupped or curved upward, but the entire margins are slightly downturned. The deciduous The
gray-green, the underside silvery; both sides have brownish scales. Midvein evident on both upper sides. surface
secondary veins are not visible. Petioles 6-10% of blade length. Inflorescence compact clusters of 2-7 on out
short stalks from second-year wood. Flowers (early spring before the leaves) 2-5 mm wide, yellow, 4-lobed very
male and female on separate bushes. Berry red, almost spherical, 5-8 mm, the surface speckled Nitn scat
tered silvery scales, with a small, dark end calyx; ripening in late summer but often persisting into winter
Seed single, elongated, semi-soft, tapered at both ends.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Autumberry has broader, larger, alternate leaves with more pointed tips and eloc
gated fruit; the distribution scarcely overlaps.
HABITAT: Dry, well-drained soil in full sunlight. Typically found in ravines and on slopes and roadsides in
prairie areas. Native.
FOOD USE: Ripe fruit can be collected by
hand or, more efficiently, by shaking branches
over a drop cloth. The flavor is better if the
fruit sits on the bush red for a while. Buf-
faloberries can be eaten fresh or made into
juice. After straining seeds out, the pulp is
great for jams, jellies, pie, or fruit leather.
Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is the Great Plains'
answer to autumn-olives, only native. The
fruit is often produced in great quantity, and
the flavor is far superior to that of Canada
buffaloberry.
137
0 1cm BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES 2 Silver buffaloberry 2 Shepherdia argentea family Elaeagnaceae QUICK flowers, CHECK: and Thorny shrub with narrow, blunt tipped, silvery, antire small, orange-red, single-seeded berries. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: (1.5-4 m) tall, the Erect, densely-branched shrub forming colonies by rhizome, trunks. Short stems to 2" (5 cm) thick. Bark gray, exfoliating in long strips 5.13 which spur-branches terminate in sharp thorns. Twigs covered in silvery on larger are eventually shed on older branches. Leaves paired, 1.5-2,5" (3,8-6.4 cm) scales, narrowly blades elliptic be to oblanceolate with rounded tips and tapered bases, tough and leathery long, but is dull may cupped or curved upward, but the entire margins are slightly downturned. The deciduous The gray-green, the underside silvery; both sides have brownish scales. Midvein evident on both upper sides. surface secondary veins are not visible. Petioles 6-10% of blade length. Inflorescence compact clusters of 2-7 on out short stalks from second-year wood. Flowers (early spring before the leaves) 2-5 mm wide, yellow, 4-lobed very male and female on separate bushes. Berry red, almost spherical, 5-8 mm, the surface speckled Nitn scat tered silvery scales, with a small, dark end calyx; ripening in late summer but often persisting into winter Seed single, elongated, semi-soft, tapered at both ends. CONFUSING PLANTS: Autumberry has broader, larger, alternate leaves with more pointed tips and eloc gated fruit; the distribution scarcely overlaps. HABITAT: Dry, well-drained soil in full sunlight. Typically found in ravines and on slopes and roadsides in prairie areas. Native. FOOD USE: Ripe fruit can be collected by hand or, more efficiently, by shaking branches over a drop cloth. The flavor is better if the fruit sits on the bush red for a while. Buf- faloberries can be eaten fresh or made into juice. After straining seeds out, the pulp is great for jams, jellies, pie, or fruit leather. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is the Great Plains' answer to autumn-olives, only native. The fruit is often produced in great quantity, and the flavor is far superior to that of Canada buffaloberry. 137 