BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED
[]
NG-410
1
Sambucus racemosa family Adoxaceae
Red elderberry
CHECK: Arching shrub with pinnately difficulty compound 1. leaves and large clusters of
DESCRIPTION: tiny QUICK red perries ripening Medium in to early large summer. multi-stemmed ID shrub new spreading shoots by near root the suckers. base.
Stems arching, and up light to 4" gray-brown (10 cm) thick, with frequent often producing large, warty Twigs lenticels. very Bark thick, on the oldest first-
trunks Bark smooth becomes greenish-brown furrowed with with narrow short plate-like hairs. Buds or flaky sometimes ridges. tiny and and have inconspicuous, brown outer but scales the flower and green buds lan- and are
year large growth and almost spherical, to 1 cm. They bulge compound, away from the usually twig with 5 leaflets (occasionally 7). sessile, Leaflets but the
purple inner scales. with Leaves acuminate paired, tips pinnately and mostly asymmetrical bases. the Side lower leaflets is more are almost so-especially along
terminal veins. leaflet Midvein has a distinct light in color petiolule. and depressed Both above; secondary the veins claw-tipped are slightly teeth pointing forward.
ceolate to ovate surfaces are hairy, but depressed, breaking
major the margin. Margins sharply and finely serrated, and densely covered in short, soft
Petiole 30-70 % of blade length, ball-like crowded panicle of usually well over 100, the recurved to
up before reaching purplish, the petiole/rachis channeled branches often at
hairs. Inflorescence Flowers an (spring) elongated 4-6 to mm across with 5 tiny sepals and 5 blunt white petals strongly spherical, 3-6 mm,
surround right angles. the ovary; 5 radiating filaments hold large yellow anthers. Berries (early summer)
bright red, smooth and glossy, yellowish inside, containing 3-5 seeds.
CONFUSING SPECIES: Black elderberry (p. 163) is easy to tell apart in flower or fruit; the rest of the year it
can be differentiated by its darker, glossier leaflets with longer petiolules and few to no hairs, the more deeply
channeled hairless rachis, and the lack of bulging flower buds.
HABITAT: Disturbed forests, forest edges, brushy areas, young woods, steep slopes, usually on moderately
rich soil. It does exceptionally well in the understory of pine plantations in locations that would normally not
support pine, and in collapsed buildings. Native.
FOOD USE: The cooked berries can be eaten in sauces and soups or mixed with other fruit. The juice is a
traditional marinade for salmon on the Northwest Coast. Flowers can be steeped for tea.
WARNING! Raw berries cause nausea; some people may be sensitive to them even cooked.
COMMENTS: Common opinion (mine
included) does not hold these berries
very palatable, but they were once an
important food on the Northwest Coast,
where they were stored in huge quantities
by or ying, and are still used to a lesser
extent today. The flavor is not fruity like
one might expect-it is more like a cross
between tomatoes and squash, and the
pulp IS yellowish. There IS a black-fruited
form of this species, but I am not aware
of It being found in our region.
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED [] NG-410 1 Sambucus racemosa family Adoxaceae Red elderberry CHECK: Arching shrub with pinnately difficulty compound 1. leaves and large clusters of DESCRIPTION: tiny QUICK red perries ripening Medium in to early large summer. multi-stemmed ID shrub new spreading shoots by near root the suckers. base. Stems arching, and up light to 4" gray-brown (10 cm) thick, with frequent often producing large, warty Twigs lenticels. very Bark thick, on the oldest first- trunks Bark smooth becomes greenish-brown furrowed with with narrow short plate-like hairs. Buds or flaky sometimes ridges. tiny and and have inconspicuous, brown outer but scales the flower and green buds lan- and are year large growth and almost spherical, to 1 cm. They bulge compound, away from the usually twig with 5 leaflets (occasionally 7). sessile, Leaflets but the purple inner scales. with Leaves acuminate paired, tips pinnately and mostly asymmetrical bases. the Side lower leaflets is more are almost so-especially along terminal veins. leaflet Midvein has a distinct light in color petiolule. and depressed Both above; secondary the veins claw-tipped are slightly teeth pointing forward. ceolate to ovate surfaces are hairy, but depressed, breaking major the margin. Margins sharply and finely serrated, and densely covered in short, soft Petiole 30-70 % of blade length, ball-like crowded panicle of usually well over 100, the recurved to up before reaching purplish, the petiole/rachis channeled branches often at hairs. Inflorescence Flowers an (spring) elongated 4-6 to mm across with 5 tiny sepals and 5 blunt white petals strongly spherical, 3-6 mm, surround right angles. the ovary; 5 radiating filaments hold large yellow anthers. Berries (early summer) bright red, smooth and glossy, yellowish inside, containing 3-5 seeds. CONFUSING SPECIES: Black elderberry (p. 163) is easy to tell apart in flower or fruit; the rest of the year it can be differentiated by its darker, glossier leaflets with longer petiolules and few to no hairs, the more deeply channeled hairless rachis, and the lack of bulging flower buds. HABITAT: Disturbed forests, forest edges, brushy areas, young woods, steep slopes, usually on moderately rich soil. It does exceptionally well in the understory of pine plantations in locations that would normally not support pine, and in collapsed buildings. Native. FOOD USE: The cooked berries can be eaten in sauces and soups or mixed with other fruit. The juice is a traditional marinade for salmon on the Northwest Coast. Flowers can be steeped for tea. WARNING! Raw berries cause nausea; some people may be sensitive to them even cooked. COMMENTS: Common opinion (mine included) does not hold these berries very palatable, but they were once an important food on the Northwest Coast, where they were stored in huge quantities by or ying, and are still used to a lesser extent today. The flavor is not fruity like one might expect-it is more like a cross between tomatoes and squash, and the pulp IS yellowish. There IS a black-fruited form of this species, but I am not aware of It being found in our region. 