mm
0
1cm
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES
4
Autumnberry
3
NG-321
Elaeagnus umbellata
family Elaeagnaceae
QUICK flakes CHECK: the Entire, lanceolate, alternate leaves and elliptic red harria,
on surface, containing a single leathery seed ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Medium to large shrub with arching, clumped stems 6 16' (2
and up to 4" (10 cm) thick, typically forming dense thickets. Bark gray and nearly 4 m) tall
on older stems. Twigs covered densely with soft red-brown ales, as are the smooth
blunt buds. Vigorous shoots may have large thorns, but many branches are thornless. small,
Leaves alternate, elliptic to lanceolate, angled at the base and blunt-pointed at the tip (smaller leaves
have rounded tips), tough and semi-leathery but deciduous, 1.5-4" (4-10 cm) long. Blades dark. dull may
top, hairless, and silvery beneath, densely covered with soft scales. Midvein and secondary veins are flat green above or
and protruding below; veinlets obscure on both sides. Margins slightly downcurved, entire but often MARY
Petioles about 10% of blade length. Inflorescence (mid spring), despite the Latin name, is a short, compact
drooping raceme of 5-10, the pedicels unequal. Flowers dull creamy yellow, funnel-shaped, 5-8 mm long. abruptly
spreading 5-7 mm wide into 4 triangular lobes. They have a cloyingly sweet smell. Berries ripen in late mmer
and fall, becoming orange or red spangled with silvery flakes. They are oblong (like an olive), 5-8 ong.
and indented at the tip. The juicy pulp contains a single grooved, leathery seed that is pointed at both ends.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Silver buffaloberry has narrower, blunt-tipped, paired leaves and more spherical berries
HABITAT: well-drained disturbed ground such as old pastures, roadsides, gravel pits. Also does very Na
on poor, dry soils in full sun or partial shade, including in oak and pine woodlands. I
FOOD USE: Gather berries when fully ripe and soft; they may turn red well before developing their best flavor
They are highly variable in quality and timing from one tree to the next, but in general the flavor is tart but
delicious when fresh. After straining the seeds, the pulp can be used for pie or jam, and also makes fantastic
fruit leather. If the pulp is allowed to sit, the solids will naturally coagulate and separate from the juice, which
is almost totally clear and can be excellent.
COMMENTS: This invasive shrub has taken
over vast areas of the eastern U.S. and in
many regions is the most abundant wild fruit.
Single bushes may produce several gallons in
a good year. Autumberry has the apility to
symbiotically fix nitrogen, giving it a competi-
tive advantage on degraded sites. The fruit is
remarkably high in lycopene, a phytonutrient
that is believed to promote prostate health.
AKA autumn-olive.
139
mm 0 1cm BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES 4 Autumnberry 3 NG-321 Elaeagnus umbellata family Elaeagnaceae QUICK flakes CHECK: the Entire, lanceolate, alternate leaves and elliptic red harria, on surface, containing a single leathery seed ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Medium to large shrub with arching, clumped stems 6 16' (2 and up to 4" (10 cm) thick, typically forming dense thickets. Bark gray and nearly 4 m) tall on older stems. Twigs covered densely with soft red-brown ales, as are the smooth blunt buds. Vigorous shoots may have large thorns, but many branches are thornless. small, Leaves alternate, elliptic to lanceolate, angled at the base and blunt-pointed at the tip (smaller leaves have rounded tips), tough and semi-leathery but deciduous, 1.5-4" (4-10 cm) long. Blades dark. dull may top, hairless, and silvery beneath, densely covered with soft scales. Midvein and secondary veins are flat green above or and protruding below; veinlets obscure on both sides. Margins slightly downcurved, entire but often MARY Petioles about 10% of blade length. Inflorescence (mid spring), despite the Latin name, is a short, compact drooping raceme of 5-10, the pedicels unequal. Flowers dull creamy yellow, funnel-shaped, 5-8 mm long. abruptly spreading 5-7 mm wide into 4 triangular lobes. They have a cloyingly sweet smell. Berries ripen in late mmer and fall, becoming orange or red spangled with silvery flakes. They are oblong (like an olive), 5-8 ong. and indented at the tip. The juicy pulp contains a single grooved, leathery seed that is pointed at both ends. CONFUSING PLANTS: Silver buffaloberry has narrower, blunt-tipped, paired leaves and more spherical berries HABITAT: well-drained disturbed ground such as old pastures, roadsides, gravel pits. Also does very Na on poor, dry soils in full sun or partial shade, including in oak and pine woodlands. I FOOD USE: Gather berries when fully ripe and soft; they may turn red well before developing their best flavor They are highly variable in quality and timing from one tree to the next, but in general the flavor is tart but delicious when fresh. After straining the seeds, the pulp can be used for pie or jam, and also makes fantastic fruit leather. If the pulp is allowed to sit, the solids will naturally coagulate and separate from the juice, which is almost totally clear and can be excellent. COMMENTS: This invasive shrub has taken over vast areas of the eastern U.S. and in many regions is the most abundant wild fruit. Single bushes may produce several gallons in a good year. Autumberry has the apility to symbiotically fix nitrogen, giving it a competi- tive advantage on degraded sites. The fruit is remarkably high in lycopene, a phytonutrient that is believed to promote prostate health. AKA autumn-olive. 139 