BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES
3
Canada buffaloberry
Shepherdia canadensis
family Elaeagnaceae
QUICK CHECK Thernless shrub with broad, entire leaves mottled with brownish scales,
tim flowers. and red. single-seeded fruits. ID difficulty 1.
Medium-sized thornless shrub forming loose thickets 2-7' (0.6-2 minutely m)
DESCRIPTION: the stems leaning or arching. Bark dark gray-brown and rather smooth but the
peeling. tall, Twigs gray-green, mottled with rusty brown scales. Where branches fork,
scales. stem is bulged Leaves paired, appears broadly ovate or elliptic with rounded bases and blunt tips, 1-4" (2.5-10 cm) long,
and jointed. Buds small, often clustered, and covered with rusty
above dotted with silvery scales, the underside with many rusty brown scales. Midvein and secondary is
veins green are evident and slightly depressed above. Margins are entire and the blade is slightly downcurved, as
the tip. Petioles 5-15% of blade length, channeled, nearly appressed to the stem, the leaf blade diverging at an
angle to the petiole. Inflorescence a short, compact spike of 4-12 from second-year wood, the pedicels very
short. Flowers (spring) 3-5 mm across, light dull yellow, 4-lobed, the male and female on separate bushes.
Berry almost spherical, 4-7 mm long, bright red with scattered brown scales, the skin thin, flesh juicy, with a
small persisting end calyx; ripens in late summer. Seed single, grooved, elongated, semi-soft.
HABITAT: Well-drained sites, rocky or gravelly areas, in full to partial sunlight, typically in sparse woods or
forest edges, especially along steep slopes, banks, rock outcroppings. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather berries when ripe in late summer
and tall, use for juice or confections. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Canada buffaloberries are very bitter
and most people who did not grow up eating them find
them quite distasteful. Nevertheless, like many bitter
foods this is an acquired taste-Canada buffaloberries
have long been enjoyed by many Native American
cultures and are traditionally beaten with oil to make
a frothy dessert, aided by the high saponin content
of the juice.
138
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES 3 Canada buffaloberry Shepherdia canadensis family Elaeagnaceae QUICK CHECK Thernless shrub with broad, entire leaves mottled with brownish scales, tim flowers. and red. single-seeded fruits. ID difficulty 1. Medium-sized thornless shrub forming loose thickets 2-7' (0.6-2 minutely m) DESCRIPTION: the stems leaning or arching. Bark dark gray-brown and rather smooth but the peeling. tall, Twigs gray-green, mottled with rusty brown scales. Where branches fork, scales. stem is bulged Leaves paired, appears broadly ovate or elliptic with rounded bases and blunt tips, 1-4" (2.5-10 cm) long, and jointed. Buds small, often clustered, and covered with rusty above dotted with silvery scales, the underside with many rusty brown scales. Midvein and secondary is veins green are evident and slightly depressed above. Margins are entire and the blade is slightly downcurved, as the tip. Petioles 5-15% of blade length, channeled, nearly appressed to the stem, the leaf blade diverging at an angle to the petiole. Inflorescence a short, compact spike of 4-12 from second-year wood, the pedicels very short. Flowers (spring) 3-5 mm across, light dull yellow, 4-lobed, the male and female on separate bushes. Berry almost spherical, 4-7 mm long, bright red with scattered brown scales, the skin thin, flesh juicy, with a small persisting end calyx; ripens in late summer. Seed single, grooved, elongated, semi-soft. HABITAT: Well-drained sites, rocky or gravelly areas, in full to partial sunlight, typically in sparse woods or forest edges, especially along steep slopes, banks, rock outcroppings. Native. FOOD USE: Gather berries when ripe in late summer and tall, use for juice or confections. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Canada buffaloberries are very bitter and most people who did not grow up eating them find them quite distasteful. Nevertheless, like many bitter foods this is an acquired taste-Canada buffaloberries have long been enjoyed by many Native American cultures and are traditionally beaten with oil to make a frothy dessert, aided by the high saponin content of the juice. 138 