0
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES
6 Squashberry
2
Viburnum edule
family Adoxaceae
QUICK CHECK: Waist to chest-high bush of rocky slopes with paired maple tike
and small clusters of red berries. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Mid-size shrub, not forming dense thickets. Stems one to few, erect
leaning, sometimes lying flat, 2-6' (0.6-2 m) long or tall, to 0.6" (15 mm) thick. Bark moder- to
ately smooth and light gray with occasional raised lenticels. Twigs green, smooth, hairless.
Buds red and green, smooth, blunt, hairless. Leaves paired, 2-3.2" (5-8cm), palmate with
3 shallow lobes. (The terminal pair of leaves is usually unlobed and ovate to lanceolate). There are hairs
margins and major veins below; otherwise the surface is hairless. Margins have broad, nipple-tipped on teeth the
Veins and veinlets are distinctly depressed above and protruding below. Petioles red, narrowly channeled,
rounded below, 30-40% of blade length, finely hairy, without glands. (However, 2 glands are present on the
base of the blade.) Inflorescence a crowded, branching cluster (cyme) of 12-40 flowers hanging from a reddish
peduncle 1-1.4" (2.5-3.5 cm) long at the end of a short branch with 2 or 3 leaves. Flowers (early to mid sum
mer) 3-5 mm across with 5 white petals. Squashberry cymes lack the ring of fake flowers that character
highbush cranberry. Berries roughly spherical, 6-9 mm, commonly 3-12 per cluster, juicy, the skin thin and
translucent, containing a single large, flat, leathery seed.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Maple-leaf viburnum Viburnum acerifolium has similarly shaped leaves, but the bark
is darker and the bitter fruit ripens
to blackish.
HABITAT: Open or semi-open boul-
dery or rocky slopes in or near boreal
forest. Native.
FOOD USE: The berries can be eaten
raw or cooked in jams, jellies, juice, or
other preparations. Tastes very similar
to highbush cranberry.
COMMENTS: This is our northern-
most viburnum. AKA highbush cran-
berry, lowbush cranberry. (This seems
like a contradiction; the first name
lumps it with V. trilobum and compares
it to bog cranberries, while the second
name compares it to V. trilobum which
is taller.) Also pembina, mooseberry
141
0 BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES 6 Squashberry 2 Viburnum edule family Adoxaceae QUICK CHECK: Waist to chest-high bush of rocky slopes with paired maple tike and small clusters of red berries. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Mid-size shrub, not forming dense thickets. Stems one to few, erect leaning, sometimes lying flat, 2-6' (0.6-2 m) long or tall, to 0.6" (15 mm) thick. Bark moder- to ately smooth and light gray with occasional raised lenticels. Twigs green, smooth, hairless. Buds red and green, smooth, blunt, hairless. Leaves paired, 2-3.2" (5-8cm), palmate with 3 shallow lobes. (The terminal pair of leaves is usually unlobed and ovate to lanceolate). There are hairs margins and major veins below; otherwise the surface is hairless. Margins have broad, nipple-tipped on teeth the Veins and veinlets are distinctly depressed above and protruding below. Petioles red, narrowly channeled, rounded below, 30-40% of blade length, finely hairy, without glands. (However, 2 glands are present on the base of the blade.) Inflorescence a crowded, branching cluster (cyme) of 12-40 flowers hanging from a reddish peduncle 1-1.4" (2.5-3.5 cm) long at the end of a short branch with 2 or 3 leaves. Flowers (early to mid sum mer) 3-5 mm across with 5 white petals. Squashberry cymes lack the ring of fake flowers that character highbush cranberry. Berries roughly spherical, 6-9 mm, commonly 3-12 per cluster, juicy, the skin thin and translucent, containing a single large, flat, leathery seed. CONFUSING PLANTS: Maple-leaf viburnum Viburnum acerifolium has similarly shaped leaves, but the bark is darker and the bitter fruit ripens to blackish. HABITAT: Open or semi-open boul- dery or rocky slopes in or near boreal forest. Native. FOOD USE: The berries can be eaten raw or cooked in jams, jellies, juice, or other preparations. Tastes very similar to highbush cranberry. COMMENTS: This is our northern- most viburnum. AKA highbush cran- berry, lowbush cranberry. (This seems like a contradiction; the first name lumps it with V. trilobum and compares it to bog cranberries, while the second name compares it to V. trilobum which is taller.) Also pembina, mooseberry 141 