BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES
5 Highbush cranberry
2
FH-318
trilobum
family
Adoxaceae
QUICK Viburnum CHECK: Clusters of juicy red berries with a single flat seed; palmately lobed
leaves. Clump-forming shrub sometimes spreading by layering. and Stems light to gray. 3"
ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: m) tall, lanky in the shade. Bark relatively smooth blunt, hairless,
(8 cm) hairless, thick and green 18' (5.5 at first turning pale gray, the buds large, plump, with 3 main lobes,
Twigs red or Leaves paired, 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, palmate Veins strongly
The southern
and shiny green. above and hairy below, mostly on the main veins. Petioles red,
edge of the range
hairless or above. nearly Margins so have large, blunt, irregularly spaced teethed. leaf. Inflores-
is uncertain
depressed channeled, 20-30% of blade length, with large glands near the base of the rim of
because most
flat-topped, branching cluster (cyme) 2.5-5" (6-13 cm) across. The outer in the
taxonomists don't
the cence cluster a has flat, sterile, "pretend" flowers 0.8" (2 cm) wide. The fertile flowers kinds
care anymore.
center white are and 5-lobed, the pistils and stamens protruding on fertile ones. Berry spherical to slightly elliptic,
much smaller (3-6 mm), all of them crammed together. Flowers of both
are 8-12 mm, red, hard at first becoming soft and juicy, containing a single, large, flat seed. Ripens in late summer
but persists through autumn.
CONFUSING PLANTS: European guelder-rose V. opulus is sometimes considered the same species, but to
foragers it certainly is not. The keyable difference is that the glands on the petiole of V. opulus are broader
than tall and concave, while those of V. trilobum are taller than broad and not concave. When ripe you can just
taste them; the American species tastes like cranberry, while the European is extremely bitter.
HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in full sun to moderate shade. Most common in river floodplains, shrub swamps,
wetland margins, or young woods and field edges where the soil is moist. Native.
FOOD USE: The berries can be gathered quickly due to the large size and clustering habit. You can pick them
as soon as they are red (even if still hard), and this is when the flavor is best. The berries occasionally remain
until winter, but they will soften and shrink. They can be used to make jelly, juice, wine, or sauce. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: The taste is reminiscent of bog cranberries. The flavor difference between the American and
European plants is extreme and unmistakable. The latter commonly escapes from cultivation and predominates
near most populated areas. Unfortunately, if you try to buy this shrub from the nursery trade, you are likely to
get the European species mislabeled as the American.
Comparison of the leaf glands of
American (right) and European
(left) highbush cranberry.
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES 5 Highbush cranberry 2 FH-318 trilobum family Adoxaceae QUICK Viburnum CHECK: Clusters of juicy red berries with a single flat seed; palmately lobed leaves. Clump-forming shrub sometimes spreading by layering. and Stems light to gray. 3" ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: m) tall, lanky in the shade. Bark relatively smooth blunt, hairless, (8 cm) hairless, thick and green 18' (5.5 at first turning pale gray, the buds large, plump, with 3 main lobes, Twigs red or Leaves paired, 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, palmate Veins strongly The southern and shiny green. above and hairy below, mostly on the main veins. Petioles red, edge of the range hairless or above. nearly Margins so have large, blunt, irregularly spaced teethed. leaf. Inflores- is uncertain depressed channeled, 20-30% of blade length, with large glands near the base of the rim of because most flat-topped, branching cluster (cyme) 2.5-5" (6-13 cm) across. The outer in the taxonomists don't the cence cluster a has flat, sterile, "pretend" flowers 0.8" (2 cm) wide. The fertile flowers kinds care anymore. center white are and 5-lobed, the pistils and stamens protruding on fertile ones. Berry spherical to slightly elliptic, much smaller (3-6 mm), all of them crammed together. Flowers of both are 8-12 mm, red, hard at first becoming soft and juicy, containing a single, large, flat seed. Ripens in late summer but persists through autumn. CONFUSING PLANTS: European guelder-rose V. opulus is sometimes considered the same species, but to foragers it certainly is not. The keyable difference is that the glands on the petiole of V. opulus are broader than tall and concave, while those of V. trilobum are taller than broad and not concave. When ripe you can just taste them; the American species tastes like cranberry, while the European is extremely bitter. HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in full sun to moderate shade. Most common in river floodplains, shrub swamps, wetland margins, or young woods and field edges where the soil is moist. Native. FOOD USE: The berries can be gathered quickly due to the large size and clustering habit. You can pick them as soon as they are red (even if still hard), and this is when the flavor is best. The berries occasionally remain until winter, but they will soften and shrink. They can be used to make jelly, juice, wine, or sauce. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: The taste is reminiscent of bog cranberries. The flavor difference between the American and European plants is extreme and unmistakable. The latter commonly escapes from cultivation and predominates near most populated areas. Unfortunately, if you try to buy this shrub from the nursery trade, you are likely to get the European species mislabeled as the American. Comparison of the leaf glands of American (right) and European (left) highbush cranberry. 