BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES
emi-open old sites ranging from dry sands to swamps. depending
fields, forest clearings and trails, lakeshores, swamp openings, or beach
in early summer, can be used as a garnish or flavoring Pulp of tipe
pies, jam, or the hips can be eaten fresh. Some people complain of hips the
hairs inside the hips irritating the digestive
tract. This problem appears to depend on
the species, the person, and the preparation
Larger hips can be cut in half and have the
inner hairy portion scooped out. Flavorful
hips can be steeped for a tea rich in vitamin
C, or simmered and strained to make rose hip
jelly. The young leaves, when dried. make a
decent tea. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Most rose hips are bland and
mealy. A few natives have good tasting hips,
but the best-tasting species all seem to be
introduced from Eurasia. However, all species
are safe and wholesome, so feel free to try any
rose flowers or hips you encounter.
Tiny hips of multiflora rose.
Wild rose leaves are pinnately compound
Rosa canina, our best tasting rose hip a
Euronean introduction
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES emi-open old sites ranging from dry sands to swamps. depending fields, forest clearings and trails, lakeshores, swamp openings, or beach in early summer, can be used as a garnish or flavoring Pulp of tipe pies, jam, or the hips can be eaten fresh. Some people complain of hips the hairs inside the hips irritating the digestive tract. This problem appears to depend on the species, the person, and the preparation Larger hips can be cut in half and have the inner hairy portion scooped out. Flavorful hips can be steeped for a tea rich in vitamin C, or simmered and strained to make rose hip jelly. The young leaves, when dried. make a decent tea. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Most rose hips are bland and mealy. A few natives have good tasting hips, but the best-tasting species all seem to be introduced from Eurasia. However, all species are safe and wholesome, so feel free to try any rose flowers or hips you encounter. Tiny hips of multiflora rose. Wild rose leaves are pinnately compound Rosa canina, our best tasting rose hip a Euronean introduction 