BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED
2
IWE-319
7
genus Rose Rosa 2 Rosaceae (Rose family)
pinnately compound leaves and toothed hairy leaflets; center.
flowers QUICK with CHECK 5 broad Prickly petals; shrubs smooth-skinned, with mealy, red fruit with a hollow,
ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Small to medium-sized clone-forming shrubs less spreading than 0.8" by
COLLECTIVE Stems prickly or bristly, reddish or green. almost always with 3-11 leaflets
suckers (2 cm) in or diameter, stolons with thin bark. Leaves alternate, stipules attached pinnately along compound the base of the rachis. Leaflets Midveins lanceolate, deeply
(mostly 5-9), with conspicuous sharp-toothed wing-like margins. Side leaflets are sessile or nearly so. usually a branching
ovate, depressed or elliptic, above; with secondary coarsely veins are depressed, several, and straight. Inflorescence
cluster (although a few species have roses sometimes
borne singly), each flower on a long pedicel. Flowers
showy, fragrant, most often pink, with 5 narrowly tri-
angular, long-pointed sepais and 5 broad-tipped petals
that are separate at the base but usually overlapping
Stamens are numerous. Fruits (hips) spherical to ovoid
or elliptic, the skin smooth and reddish, the flesh mealy
or pulpy, usually in a thin layer. The center of the hip
is hollow, where the several seeds are found mixed
with hairs. Many hips have constricted, nipple-like
ends and retain their 5-part calyces. They ripen in
late summer to fall.
SPECIES: There are about 2 dozen species of wild
roses in our region-too many to list here. They vary
greatly in the quality of their fruits and flowers. I pro-
vide photos of a few representatives 50 you can rec-
ognize the group, and you can try out those in your
area. The highly invasive Multiflora rose R. multiflora
is unusual: The flowers are much smaller than those
of our native roses and white. The hips are also small.
While there is little pulp to be had from them, they have
a nice tangy flavor. This shrub's long, arching stems
have formidable prickles and often form impenetrable
thickets. Rugosa rose R. rugosa has very large hips and
keys out into group 6.
Hips of smooth wild rose.
142
Hower of typical wild rose
A
Multitiora rose has small white flowers.
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED 2 IWE-319 7 genus Rose Rosa 2 Rosaceae (Rose family) pinnately compound leaves and toothed hairy leaflets; center. flowers QUICK with CHECK 5 broad Prickly petals; shrubs smooth-skinned, with mealy, red fruit with a hollow, ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Small to medium-sized clone-forming shrubs less spreading than 0.8" by COLLECTIVE Stems prickly or bristly, reddish or green. almost always with 3-11 leaflets suckers (2 cm) in or diameter, stolons with thin bark. Leaves alternate, stipules attached pinnately along compound the base of the rachis. Leaflets Midveins lanceolate, deeply (mostly 5-9), with conspicuous sharp-toothed wing-like margins. Side leaflets are sessile or nearly so. usually a branching ovate, depressed or elliptic, above; with secondary coarsely veins are depressed, several, and straight. Inflorescence cluster (although a few species have roses sometimes borne singly), each flower on a long pedicel. Flowers showy, fragrant, most often pink, with 5 narrowly tri- angular, long-pointed sepais and 5 broad-tipped petals that are separate at the base but usually overlapping Stamens are numerous. Fruits (hips) spherical to ovoid or elliptic, the skin smooth and reddish, the flesh mealy or pulpy, usually in a thin layer. The center of the hip is hollow, where the several seeds are found mixed with hairs. Many hips have constricted, nipple-like ends and retain their 5-part calyces. They ripen in late summer to fall. SPECIES: There are about 2 dozen species of wild roses in our region-too many to list here. They vary greatly in the quality of their fruits and flowers. I pro- vide photos of a few representatives 50 you can rec- ognize the group, and you can try out those in your area. The highly invasive Multiflora rose R. multiflora is unusual: The flowers are much smaller than those of our native roses and white. The hips are also small. While there is little pulp to be had from them, they have a nice tangy flavor. This shrub's long, arching stems have formidable prickles and often form impenetrable thickets. Rugosa rose R. rugosa has very large hips and keys out into group 6. Hips of smooth wild rose. 142 Hower of typical wild rose A Multitiora rose has small white flowers. 