BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE 10)
8
Mahonia Agarita trifoliata 3 Berberidaceae (Barberry family)
Evergreen shrub with compound leaves of 3 sessile leaflets, difficulty the 1. lobe
tips QUICK stiff CHECK: with needle points; yellow flowers and bright red berries. ID
Shrub to 10 (3 m) tall. Bark gray to red brown on older stems, covered brown with or
DESCRIPTION: scales. Branches stiff; twigs are smooth, red or green at first turning leaflets, on
small, The thin wood is yellow. Leaves evergreen, alternate, compound with 3 sessile cm)
a gray. hairless petiole about equal to leaflet length. Leaflets 1-2.5" (2.5-6.4
reddish-green stiff and tough, lanceolate in outline with 3-7 lobes, each lobe acuminate with a stiff, multiple needle-like short
point. of few flowers borne at the same node, the pedicels 0.3-0.7" (8-18 mm). Flowers (February-April)
long, very Surface hairless with flat whitish veins above, the lower surface paler. Inflorescence
bisexual, racemes 9-12 a mm across, with 6 sepals and 6 petals, alternating smaller and larger, all of them bright yellow
and cupped with broad rounded tips and narrowed bases. The sepais are distant, while the petals overlap,
and the two layers do not touch each other when open. One stamen is pressed against the center of each
petal. Fruit oval to rounded, 7-10 mm, bright red, shiny, aromatic, containing several elliptic, crunchy seeds,
ripening from mid April to early June.
HABITAT: Rocky, hilly, sunny, well-drained open woods
or brushy country. Native.
FOOD USE: Ripe berries make an intensely sour but
excellent juice that can be drunk diluted, used to make
wine or jelly, or mixed with mild fruits to make leather.
COMMENTS: These can often be collected in great
quantity, for the bushes are abundant and can yield
heavily. Agarita is a very common shrub in the Texas
Hill Country and is occasionally grown as a hedge. It is
closely related to Oregon grape and contains berberine,
for which it has been used medicinally in a similar fash-
ion. A yellow dye can be made from the wood, especially
of the root. AKA algerita, agarito, paío amarillo, and
many other names.
144
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE 10) 8 Mahonia Agarita trifoliata 3 Berberidaceae (Barberry family) Evergreen shrub with compound leaves of 3 sessile leaflets, difficulty the 1. lobe tips QUICK stiff CHECK: with needle points; yellow flowers and bright red berries. ID Shrub to 10 (3 m) tall. Bark gray to red brown on older stems, covered brown with or DESCRIPTION: scales. Branches stiff; twigs are smooth, red or green at first turning leaflets, on small, The thin wood is yellow. Leaves evergreen, alternate, compound with 3 sessile cm) a gray. hairless petiole about equal to leaflet length. Leaflets 1-2.5" (2.5-6.4 reddish-green stiff and tough, lanceolate in outline with 3-7 lobes, each lobe acuminate with a stiff, multiple needle-like short point. of few flowers borne at the same node, the pedicels 0.3-0.7" (8-18 mm). Flowers (February-April) long, very Surface hairless with flat whitish veins above, the lower surface paler. Inflorescence bisexual, racemes 9-12 a mm across, with 6 sepals and 6 petals, alternating smaller and larger, all of them bright yellow and cupped with broad rounded tips and narrowed bases. The sepais are distant, while the petals overlap, and the two layers do not touch each other when open. One stamen is pressed against the center of each petal. Fruit oval to rounded, 7-10 mm, bright red, shiny, aromatic, containing several elliptic, crunchy seeds, ripening from mid April to early June. HABITAT: Rocky, hilly, sunny, well-drained open woods or brushy country. Native. FOOD USE: Ripe berries make an intensely sour but excellent juice that can be drunk diluted, used to make wine or jelly, or mixed with mild fruits to make leather. COMMENTS: These can often be collected in great quantity, for the bushes are abundant and can yield heavily. Agarita is a very common shrub in the Texas Hill Country and is occasionally grown as a hedge. It is closely related to Oregon grape and contains berberine, for which it has been used medicinally in a similar fash- ion. A yellow dye can be made from the wood, especially of the root. AKA algerita, agarito, paío amarillo, and many other names. 144 