0
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES
9
Goji berry
2
2
Lycium barbarum Solanaceae (Nightshade family)
QUICK ariable CHECK: Arching thorny shrub with clumped or alternate entire leaves of highly
size; long red berries with many small seeds. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: A sprawling shrub with multiple weak, arching stems to about 1" (2
thick, these often resting on other vegetation for support or the tips returning to the 5 cm)
to 10' (3 m) long and reaching about half as high. Bark thin and gray, smooth but with ground, thin,
raised lengthwise ridges; older bark has streaks of corky russeting. Short thorns grow at
scattered nodes but are not particularly sharp or stiff, Leaves 0.3-0.8" (8-20 mm) long on older wood, but
be up to 3" (8 cm) on new shoots. They are borne alternately on young shoots, and in clumps on older wood, may
the outer leaves of the clump much smaller than the central leaf. Blades thin, brittle, smooth, hairless. entire,
elliptic to lanceolate or oblanceolate, the tips blunt-pointed or rounded. Midvein and secondary veins are
slightly depressed above, protruding below; secondary veins are few and do not reach the margins. Petioles
10-20% of blade length, winged, the wing gradually widening into the leaf base. Inflorescence single or in
clusters of up to 7 from leaf axils. Flowers (late spring through fall) 7-9 mm wide, the corolla tube-like with
usually 5 (occasionally 4) spreading, light purple lobes. Berry elliptic, 0.3-0.7" (8-18 mm) long with smooth,
bright-red skin, narrowed at both ends and nipple-like at the base, juicy inside with many small, flattened,
whitish seeds. It hangs on a green pedicel about 0.8" (2 cm) long that expands toward the tip into an irregular
calyx with 3-5 unequal lobes.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Barberries have no calyx at the base and have larger, harder seeds.
HABITAT: Disturbed wooded and brushy areas in partial shade: roadsides, old homesteads, urban woodlots,
forest and road edges, brushy floodplains. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Gather the ripe berries from late summer to
autumn and eat fresh or dried. Young leaves also make a
decent raw green or potherb.
COMMENTS: Goji berries are popular as a health food
and can be easily purchased in the dried form. They have
long been used as food in their native China and have a
reputation for promoting health and longevity. Long ago
this berry was a popular ornamental here; it escaped from
cultivation and has become locally common. AKA mat-
rimony vine.
145
0 BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES 9 Goji berry 2 2 Lycium barbarum Solanaceae (Nightshade family) QUICK ariable CHECK: Arching thorny shrub with clumped or alternate entire leaves of highly size; long red berries with many small seeds. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: A sprawling shrub with multiple weak, arching stems to about 1" (2 thick, these often resting on other vegetation for support or the tips returning to the 5 cm) to 10' (3 m) long and reaching about half as high. Bark thin and gray, smooth but with ground, thin, raised lengthwise ridges; older bark has streaks of corky russeting. Short thorns grow at scattered nodes but are not particularly sharp or stiff, Leaves 0.3-0.8" (8-20 mm) long on older wood, but be up to 3" (8 cm) on new shoots. They are borne alternately on young shoots, and in clumps on older wood, may the outer leaves of the clump much smaller than the central leaf. Blades thin, brittle, smooth, hairless. entire, elliptic to lanceolate or oblanceolate, the tips blunt-pointed or rounded. Midvein and secondary veins are slightly depressed above, protruding below; secondary veins are few and do not reach the margins. Petioles 10-20% of blade length, winged, the wing gradually widening into the leaf base. Inflorescence single or in clusters of up to 7 from leaf axils. Flowers (late spring through fall) 7-9 mm wide, the corolla tube-like with usually 5 (occasionally 4) spreading, light purple lobes. Berry elliptic, 0.3-0.7" (8-18 mm) long with smooth, bright-red skin, narrowed at both ends and nipple-like at the base, juicy inside with many small, flattened, whitish seeds. It hangs on a green pedicel about 0.8" (2 cm) long that expands toward the tip into an irregular calyx with 3-5 unequal lobes. CONFUSING PLANTS: Barberries have no calyx at the base and have larger, harder seeds. HABITAT: Disturbed wooded and brushy areas in partial shade: roadsides, old homesteads, urban woodlots, forest and road edges, brushy floodplains. Introduced. FOOD USE: Gather the ripe berries from late summer to autumn and eat fresh or dried. Young leaves also make a decent raw green or potherb. COMMENTS: Goji berries are popular as a health food and can be easily purchased in the dried form. They have long been used as food in their native China and have a reputation for promoting health and longevity. Long ago this berry was a popular ornamental here; it escaped from cultivation and has become locally common. AKA mat- rimony vine. 145 