BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES
11 European barberry
3
1
Berberis vulgaris + family Berberidaceae
QUICK CHECK: Thorny shrub with are bing stems, chimped leaves with spiny margin-
and small red fruit in hanging clusters. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Stems multiple, 4-9' (1.2-3 m) long; new stems straight and erect, older
ones arching with drooping branches. Bark light green at first, becoming gray with a darker
brown latticework of low, papery ridges. Twigs grooved, bearing scattered thorns in sets
of 3, each 5-10 mm long, flattened, and broad at the base. There are 3 ridges running down
from each node onto the twig. Leaves 0.3-2" (0.8-5 cm) long, alternate on new shoots but
borne in clumps of 2-9 on older wood, each clump associated with a thorn and containing
This plant has
been eradicated
leaves of varying size. Blades broadly obovate to elliptic (narrower on older growth), hair-
from many
less on both sides, slightly downcurved, the base tapered, the tip rounded but with a tiny
areas and was
extending bristle. Midvein slightly depressed; smaller veins mostly obscure or minutely
once more
depressed. Margins usually entire on the leaves of green shoots but leaves on older growth
widespread.
have scattered bristle-teeth pointing forward. Petioles wide and up to 100% of blade length-it is hard to say
where the petiole ends and the leaf begins, and some leaves could be construed as sessile. Inflorescence a
drooping raceme 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long of up to 19 flowers on thin pedicels. Flowers (spring) 4-5 mm across,
with 6 sepals and 6 blunt petals, all bright yellow. Stamens are hidden, pressed against the petals, and there
is one large pistil. Berry elongated, almost cylindrical, often broader toward the black tip, 0.5-0.7" (13-18 mm)
long, bright red, juicy when ripe in fall, borne on a very thin pedicel 4-7 mm long. Seeds dark, elongated; slightly
curved, flat on one side, soft, one to a few per fruit.
HABITAT: Old fields, forest edges, pastures, woodlots. Introduced. I
FOOD USE: Use the very sour fruit to make jam, jelly, or juice. The leaves are also sour and can be nibbled
or steeped to brew a tart drink.
COMMENTS: Barberry was formerly cultivated for its tangy fruit. Thoreau (2002) reported gathering and
selling bushel baskets of this berry in Massachusetts. After it was discovered that barberry was an alternate
host for wheat stem rust, a concerted effort was made to eradicate it, especially in wheat-growing regions. but
it remains rather common in some areas. Appalachian barberry B. canadensis is a similar native species confined
to the southern Appalachians. It is shorter, has toothed leaves, and bears smaller clusters of less juicy fruit.
147
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES 11 European barberry 3 1 Berberis vulgaris + family Berberidaceae QUICK CHECK: Thorny shrub with are bing stems, chimped leaves with spiny margin- and small red fruit in hanging clusters. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Stems multiple, 4-9' (1.2-3 m) long; new stems straight and erect, older ones arching with drooping branches. Bark light green at first, becoming gray with a darker brown latticework of low, papery ridges. Twigs grooved, bearing scattered thorns in sets of 3, each 5-10 mm long, flattened, and broad at the base. There are 3 ridges running down from each node onto the twig. Leaves 0.3-2" (0.8-5 cm) long, alternate on new shoots but borne in clumps of 2-9 on older wood, each clump associated with a thorn and containing This plant has been eradicated leaves of varying size. Blades broadly obovate to elliptic (narrower on older growth), hair- from many less on both sides, slightly downcurved, the base tapered, the tip rounded but with a tiny areas and was extending bristle. Midvein slightly depressed; smaller veins mostly obscure or minutely once more depressed. Margins usually entire on the leaves of green shoots but leaves on older growth widespread. have scattered bristle-teeth pointing forward. Petioles wide and up to 100% of blade length-it is hard to say where the petiole ends and the leaf begins, and some leaves could be construed as sessile. Inflorescence a drooping raceme 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long of up to 19 flowers on thin pedicels. Flowers (spring) 4-5 mm across, with 6 sepals and 6 blunt petals, all bright yellow. Stamens are hidden, pressed against the petals, and there is one large pistil. Berry elongated, almost cylindrical, often broader toward the black tip, 0.5-0.7" (13-18 mm) long, bright red, juicy when ripe in fall, borne on a very thin pedicel 4-7 mm long. Seeds dark, elongated; slightly curved, flat on one side, soft, one to a few per fruit. HABITAT: Old fields, forest edges, pastures, woodlots. Introduced. I FOOD USE: Use the very sour fruit to make jam, jelly, or juice. The leaves are also sour and can be nibbled or steeped to brew a tart drink. COMMENTS: Barberry was formerly cultivated for its tangy fruit. Thoreau (2002) reported gathering and selling bushel baskets of this berry in Massachusetts. After it was discovered that barberry was an alternate host for wheat stem rust, a concerted effort was made to eradicate it, especially in wheat-growing regions. but it remains rather common in some areas. Appalachian barberry B. canadensis is a similar native species confined to the southern Appalachians. It is shorter, has toothed leaves, and bears smaller clusters of less juicy fruit. 147 