BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES
10 Christmas berry
2
2
Lycium carolinianum Solanaceae (Nightshade family)
QUICK CHECK: Sprawling thorny coastal shrub with arching pale branches, fleshy,
almost needle shaped leaves, and hanging glossy-red berries with numerous tiny
seeds. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Shrub 4-10' (1.2-3 m) tall, the major branches large, often forking dichoto-
mously, arching and sprawling, supporting scattered, short, thorn-tipped spur branches.
Stems grow straight and vertical, shoot-like, with very short side branches, before arching
over. Twigs are very bumpy. Bark smooth and light chalky gray. Leaves mostly tufted on older growth, alternate
on shoots, evergreen or nearly so, sessile, fleshy and succulent, 0.2-1.2" (0.5-3 cm) long. Blades are linear or
narrowly oblanceolate to club-shaped or almost needle-shaped, wider near the blunt tip and tapered to the
base. with entire margins. Midvein flat to faintly depressed
above; other veins not evident. Flowers (summer to winter,
but mostly fall) bisexual, solitary from the leaf axils on droop-
ing pedicels, tubular, the calyx and corolla both split into 4
(occasionally more) lobes. Corolla pale purplish-blue (fading
to yellow), spreading 8-12 mm wide, the tube hairy inside, one
stamen protruding at each cleft between lobes. Fruit shiny, red,
0.3-0.7" (8-18 mm) long, ovoid to elliptic, juicy, soft, ripening
nearly year-round but mostly fall to midwinter, containing
dozens of tiny seeds.
HABITAT: Full sun on beaches, margins of coastal wetlands
(or ridges or mounds within them), shell mounds, ditches;
occasionally on salt flats inland. Native.
FOOD USE: Ripe fruit can be eaten fresh or dried. Succulent
salty leaves can be nibbled year-round.
COMMENTS: This close relative of the goji berry is even better
and makes fun foraging at a time when few berries are ripe.
146
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES 10 Christmas berry 2 2 Lycium carolinianum Solanaceae (Nightshade family) QUICK CHECK: Sprawling thorny coastal shrub with arching pale branches, fleshy, almost needle shaped leaves, and hanging glossy-red berries with numerous tiny seeds. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Shrub 4-10' (1.2-3 m) tall, the major branches large, often forking dichoto- mously, arching and sprawling, supporting scattered, short, thorn-tipped spur branches. Stems grow straight and vertical, shoot-like, with very short side branches, before arching over. Twigs are very bumpy. Bark smooth and light chalky gray. Leaves mostly tufted on older growth, alternate on shoots, evergreen or nearly so, sessile, fleshy and succulent, 0.2-1.2" (0.5-3 cm) long. Blades are linear or narrowly oblanceolate to club-shaped or almost needle-shaped, wider near the blunt tip and tapered to the base. with entire margins. Midvein flat to faintly depressed above; other veins not evident. Flowers (summer to winter, but mostly fall) bisexual, solitary from the leaf axils on droop- ing pedicels, tubular, the calyx and corolla both split into 4 (occasionally more) lobes. Corolla pale purplish-blue (fading to yellow), spreading 8-12 mm wide, the tube hairy inside, one stamen protruding at each cleft between lobes. Fruit shiny, red, 0.3-0.7" (8-18 mm) long, ovoid to elliptic, juicy, soft, ripening nearly year-round but mostly fall to midwinter, containing dozens of tiny seeds. HABITAT: Full sun on beaches, margins of coastal wetlands (or ridges or mounds within them), shell mounds, ditches; occasionally on salt flats inland. Native. FOOD USE: Ripe fruit can be eaten fresh or dried. Succulent salty leaves can be nibbled year-round. COMMENTS: This close relative of the goji berry is even better and makes fun foraging at a time when few berries are ripe. 146 