0
Icm
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES
14 Red currant
3
Ribes triste Grossulariaceae (Gooseberry family)
QUICK CHECK: Small shrub with maple-like leaves and hanging clusters of juic 1. sphen
al red berries with multiple tiny seeds. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Low, spreading, unarmed shrub, rooting at branch tips and growing scat-
tered or in loose colonies. Stems to 3' (1 m) tall, thin with few branches, dark red-brown
and hairless; twigs faintly ridged, gray, and hairless. Leaves alternate, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm)
long, palmate with 3 major lobes. The upper surface is sparsely hairy with all veins deeply
depressed; the lower surface is moderately hairy. Margins finely hairy and double-serrated, the teeth blunt in
rounded with light claw-tips. Petioles straight, 40-70% of blade length, often hairy. Inflorescence a drooping
raceme of 6-20, often hidden under leaves, 1-2.5" (2.5-6 long. Flowers appear almost flat, 3-5 mm accoss.
pinkish to purple-mottled, with 5 narrow spreading petals (almost too small to see) and 5 much larger, broad.
reflexed sepals (which at a glance appear to be the petals). The stamens are very short. Berries spherical.
5-9 mm, in clusters of 4-9, smooth, ripening to translucent red, containing several soft seeds. This IS our only
red-fruited currant with smooth skin.
HABITAT: Low, wet hardwood or conifer forests. Especially common on banks of small streams and in shrus
swamps; tolerates heavy shade.
Native.
FOOD USE: Eat fresh berries whole
in midsummer, or juice them for
drinking or making desserts. Con-
servation 1.
COMMENTS: The flavor of these
is very similar to that of cultivated
red currants, but wild red currants
are smaller and grow on smaller
bushes, usually widely scattered in
small clusters. if you can manage to
get any quantity, they make superb
jam or jelly.
0 Icm BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES 14 Red currant 3 Ribes triste Grossulariaceae (Gooseberry family) QUICK CHECK: Small shrub with maple-like leaves and hanging clusters of juic 1. sphen al red berries with multiple tiny seeds. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Low, spreading, unarmed shrub, rooting at branch tips and growing scat- tered or in loose colonies. Stems to 3' (1 m) tall, thin with few branches, dark red-brown and hairless; twigs faintly ridged, gray, and hairless. Leaves alternate, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, palmate with 3 major lobes. The upper surface is sparsely hairy with all veins deeply depressed; the lower surface is moderately hairy. Margins finely hairy and double-serrated, the teeth blunt in rounded with light claw-tips. Petioles straight, 40-70% of blade length, often hairy. Inflorescence a drooping raceme of 6-20, often hidden under leaves, 1-2.5" (2.5-6 long. Flowers appear almost flat, 3-5 mm accoss. pinkish to purple-mottled, with 5 narrow spreading petals (almost too small to see) and 5 much larger, broad. reflexed sepals (which at a glance appear to be the petals). The stamens are very short. Berries spherical. 5-9 mm, in clusters of 4-9, smooth, ripening to translucent red, containing several soft seeds. This IS our only red-fruited currant with smooth skin. HABITAT: Low, wet hardwood or conifer forests. Especially common on banks of small streams and in shrus swamps; tolerates heavy shade. Native. FOOD USE: Eat fresh berries whole in midsummer, or juice them for drinking or making desserts. Con- servation 1. COMMENTS: The flavor of these is very similar to that of cultivated red currants, but wild red currants are smaller and grow on smaller bushes, usually widely scattered in small clusters. if you can manage to get any quantity, they make superb jam or jelly. 