BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES
editic
Berberis
thunbergii
1
12 Japanese ter bush rarely barberry more than chest-high. The stems to 1.2" more (3 arching cm) long. and Flowers less erect, are
and the thorn at eac node is single. The of leaves The fruit is 7-9 mm long and similar.
This is a shor are entire, mealy rather
produced in small nearly umbel-like as good clusters as European 1-4. barberry-but the for tangy wheat leaves stem are rust, it has
than Because juicy-not Japanese barberry cannot serve as an alternate host
not been subject to eradication efforts. I
III
13 Spicebush
Lindera benzoin
Lauraceae (Laurel family)
QUICK CHECK: Alternate, entire, aromatic leaves and red berries with yellowish flesh
and a single dark seed. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Large shrub 4-12' (1.2-3.7 m) tall. Bark of trunks has по ridges or scales
but many small raised bumps. Trunks tend to be crooked, and the branch angles wide.
Twigs aromatic, thin and gray, hairless, conspicuously dotted with raised lenticels, with
small rounded flower buds clustered around the nodes; new growth is green and hairy.
Leaves alternate, entire, 2-7" (5-18 cm) long, thin and delicate, obovate to oval, acute at both ends, with soft
hairs along the margin and main veins below. Midvein slightly depressed above; secondary veins few, broadly
angled, and slightly depressed above; veinlets flat. Petioles 5-8% of blade length, finely hairy, grooved. Flow-
ers in short-stalked clusters of 3-6 in early spring, each tiny and yellow with 3 petals. Berries oval, 8-10 mm
long. hanging on short pedicels, the skin smooth, ripening to bright red on the outside, yellowish to pink inside,
the fiesh aromatic. Seed single, dark, elongated, smooth.
HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in moderate shade: hardwood forests, especially
in valleys and on high river floodplains, or near lakes and ponds, Native.
FOOD USE: Gather ripe fruits from late summer through fall to use as a
seasoning fresh or dried. llike the pulp better than the seed, so separate
them. Twigs can be collected at any time of year and steeped in hot water for
tea The leaves can also be used for lea, and the young ones can be chopped
mis dishes in small amounts for their distinct flavor. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: Spicebush is c member of the laurel family, a group rife with
aromatic Oils Other members
of this family include cinnamon.
Sabsatras bay teat. and av()-
cade Southern spicebush Lin
dera melissitolio I: mare species
or altered If the Deep South 11
may DC sumilarly edible but it
protected and Have not tried It
148
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES editic Berberis thunbergii 1 12 Japanese ter bush rarely barberry more than chest-high. The stems to 1.2" more (3 arching cm) long. and Flowers less erect, are and the thorn at eac node is single. The of leaves The fruit is 7-9 mm long and similar. This is a shor are entire, mealy rather produced in small nearly umbel-like as good clusters as European 1-4. barberry-but the for tangy wheat leaves stem are rust, it has than Because juicy-not Japanese barberry cannot serve as an alternate host not been subject to eradication efforts. I III 13 Spicebush Lindera benzoin Lauraceae (Laurel family) QUICK CHECK: Alternate, entire, aromatic leaves and red berries with yellowish flesh and a single dark seed. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Large shrub 4-12' (1.2-3.7 m) tall. Bark of trunks has по ridges or scales but many small raised bumps. Trunks tend to be crooked, and the branch angles wide. Twigs aromatic, thin and gray, hairless, conspicuously dotted with raised lenticels, with small rounded flower buds clustered around the nodes; new growth is green and hairy. Leaves alternate, entire, 2-7" (5-18 cm) long, thin and delicate, obovate to oval, acute at both ends, with soft hairs along the margin and main veins below. Midvein slightly depressed above; secondary veins few, broadly angled, and slightly depressed above; veinlets flat. Petioles 5-8% of blade length, finely hairy, grooved. Flow- ers in short-stalked clusters of 3-6 in early spring, each tiny and yellow with 3 petals. Berries oval, 8-10 mm long. hanging on short pedicels, the skin smooth, ripening to bright red on the outside, yellowish to pink inside, the fiesh aromatic. Seed single, dark, elongated, smooth. HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in moderate shade: hardwood forests, especially in valleys and on high river floodplains, or near lakes and ponds, Native. FOOD USE: Gather ripe fruits from late summer through fall to use as a seasoning fresh or dried. llike the pulp better than the seed, so separate them. Twigs can be collected at any time of year and steeped in hot water for tea The leaves can also be used for lea, and the young ones can be chopped mis dishes in small amounts for their distinct flavor. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: Spicebush is c member of the laurel family, a group rife with aromatic Oils Other members of this family include cinnamon. Sabsatras bay teat. and av()- cade Southern spicebush Lin dera melissitolio I: mare species or altered If the Deep South 11 may DC sumilarly edible but it protected and Have not tried It 148 