BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES
15 Skunk currant
Ribes glandulosum Grossulariaceae (Gooseberry family)
QUICK CHECK: Low shrub, the leaves with pointed palmate lobes and depressed veins;
strong musky smell and racemes of red berries with gland-tipped hairs. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Low unarmed shrub, the branches resting on the ground or weakly
elevated, rooting at the nodes. Bark of older stems is smooth and blackish, often with
exfoliating sections. Branches are hairless and the twigs are ridged or angled. A musky
odor is released when leaves or bark are rubbed. Leaves alternate, 1-3.5" (2.5-9 cm) long,
palmate, with 5-7 pointed lobes, the base heart-shaped. Surface dark green and hairless above with all veins
deeply depressed; paler beneath with fine hairs, especially along the veins. Margins double toothed, the teeth
large and blunt with nipple tips. Petioles about equal to blade length, not grooved, with fine hairs, the base
expanded and sheath-like with a few glandular hairs. Inflorescence an upright raceme of 4-10, the rachis and
pedicels with gland-tipped hairs. Flowers (late spring) bowl-shaped, to 5 mm across, the outer margin with
an alternating ring of 5 pink petals and 5 much larger whitish-green sepals, both wider toward the tip and
sometimes shallowly 3-lobed. Fruit a spherical red berry 6 mm in diameter, soft, translucent, and covered
with long glandular hairs, ripening in mid to late summer, containing multiple soft seeds.
HABITAT: Shaded to partly sunny sites with thin, mossy soil, often over rock. Edges of boreal forests on rocky
soil. Native.
FOOD USE: Ripe berries can
be eaten raw or cooked. Con-
servation 1.
COMMENTS: This currant has
a unique sour and musky flavor
that many find disagreeable at
first, but some develop a taste
for it.
RELATED EDIBLES: Northern
black currant R. hudsonianum
has similar leaves and erect
flower clusters, but the fruit
ripens to purple-black. This spe-
cies 15 found mostly in conifer
swamps and, like skunk currant,
is edible but not choice.
150
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES 15 Skunk currant Ribes glandulosum Grossulariaceae (Gooseberry family) QUICK CHECK: Low shrub, the leaves with pointed palmate lobes and depressed veins; strong musky smell and racemes of red berries with gland-tipped hairs. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Low unarmed shrub, the branches resting on the ground or weakly elevated, rooting at the nodes. Bark of older stems is smooth and blackish, often with exfoliating sections. Branches are hairless and the twigs are ridged or angled. A musky odor is released when leaves or bark are rubbed. Leaves alternate, 1-3.5" (2.5-9 cm) long, palmate, with 5-7 pointed lobes, the base heart-shaped. Surface dark green and hairless above with all veins deeply depressed; paler beneath with fine hairs, especially along the veins. Margins double toothed, the teeth large and blunt with nipple tips. Petioles about equal to blade length, not grooved, with fine hairs, the base expanded and sheath-like with a few glandular hairs. Inflorescence an upright raceme of 4-10, the rachis and pedicels with gland-tipped hairs. Flowers (late spring) bowl-shaped, to 5 mm across, the outer margin with an alternating ring of 5 pink petals and 5 much larger whitish-green sepals, both wider toward the tip and sometimes shallowly 3-lobed. Fruit a spherical red berry 6 mm in diameter, soft, translucent, and covered with long glandular hairs, ripening in mid to late summer, containing multiple soft seeds. HABITAT: Shaded to partly sunny sites with thin, mossy soil, often over rock. Edges of boreal forests on rocky soil. Native. FOOD USE: Ripe berries can be eaten raw or cooked. Con- servation 1. COMMENTS: This currant has a unique sour and musky flavor that many find disagreeable at first, but some develop a taste for it. RELATED EDIBLES: Northern black currant R. hudsonianum has similar leaves and erect flower clusters, but the fruit ripens to purple-black. This spe- cies 15 found mostly in conifer swamps and, like skunk currant, is edible but not choice. 150 