0
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES
16 Red aronia
1
Aronia arbutifolia
Rosaceae
(Rose
family)
QUICK CHECK: Erect, lanky, colonial hog shrub with toothed simple leaves
of red fruit in fall. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Shrub forming colonies by root suckers. Stems erect, thin and lanky with
few ascending branches, 4-16' (1.2-5 m) tall, the bark dark gray. Twigs gray and woolly with
large, pointed, red-tipped buds. Leaves alternate, 1.5-4" (4-10 cm) long, elliptic to obovate
or oblanceolate, the base tapered and the tip abruptly pointed or blunt. Blades are glossy
and hairless above, the underside coated with fine wool. Midvein depressed above, with a
row of tiny, dark-purple, raised gland-dots. Secondary veins and veinlets are also depressed
above. Margins serrated with small, blunt, purplish gland-tipped teeth. Petioles about 10% of blade length
covered in fine wool, with narrow, soft stipules attached at the base (often falling late in the season) Inflores-
cence a flat-topped, spreading, compact terminal cluster of 8-30, the stems densely woolly. Flowers (spring)
with a 5-lobed calyx. The corolla is 9-12 mm across with 5 broad petals that are narrowed and fully separated
at the base, pink becoming white. There are 5 pistils, and numerous stamens. Berries spherical, 7-9 mm. od
the surface with fine wool, the end with a 5-point dimple and a persistent calyx. The flesh of somewhat dry i'o
contains several soft seeds, ripening in fall but often persisting into winter.
HABITAT: Acidic moist ground in full to partial sun. Pond and lake margins, bogs, low spots in flatwoods.
swamp openings, ditches. Native.
FOOD USE: The fruits are rather dry and astringent but can be good when mixed with blander fruits for
leather, jelly, juice, or in baked goods. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This attractive shrub is often planted outside of it natural habitat as a landscape element. In
such places it tends to grow faster and larger than in its natural boggy haunts. Unfortunately the fruit is not as
juicy nor quite as flavorful as its dark-fruited cousin (p. 169). There is also a purple aronia, somewhere between
the red and black aronia in
most characteristics-and
indeed, many taxonomists
recognize it as no more than
a hybrid between them.
AKA red chokeberry. The
chokeberries are placed in
the genera Photinia, Aronia,
Sorbus, and Pyrus by various
taxonomists.
151
0 BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH ORANGE TO RED BERRIES 16 Red aronia 1 Aronia arbutifolia Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK CHECK: Erect, lanky, colonial hog shrub with toothed simple leaves of red fruit in fall. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Shrub forming colonies by root suckers. Stems erect, thin and lanky with few ascending branches, 4-16' (1.2-5 m) tall, the bark dark gray. Twigs gray and woolly with large, pointed, red-tipped buds. Leaves alternate, 1.5-4" (4-10 cm) long, elliptic to obovate or oblanceolate, the base tapered and the tip abruptly pointed or blunt. Blades are glossy and hairless above, the underside coated with fine wool. Midvein depressed above, with a row of tiny, dark-purple, raised gland-dots. Secondary veins and veinlets are also depressed above. Margins serrated with small, blunt, purplish gland-tipped teeth. Petioles about 10% of blade length covered in fine wool, with narrow, soft stipules attached at the base (often falling late in the season) Inflores- cence a flat-topped, spreading, compact terminal cluster of 8-30, the stems densely woolly. Flowers (spring) with a 5-lobed calyx. The corolla is 9-12 mm across with 5 broad petals that are narrowed and fully separated at the base, pink becoming white. There are 5 pistils, and numerous stamens. Berries spherical, 7-9 mm. od the surface with fine wool, the end with a 5-point dimple and a persistent calyx. The flesh of somewhat dry i'o contains several soft seeds, ripening in fall but often persisting into winter. HABITAT: Acidic moist ground in full to partial sun. Pond and lake margins, bogs, low spots in flatwoods. swamp openings, ditches. Native. FOOD USE: The fruits are rather dry and astringent but can be good when mixed with blander fruits for leather, jelly, juice, or in baked goods. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This attractive shrub is often planted outside of it natural habitat as a landscape element. In such places it tends to grow faster and larger than in its natural boggy haunts. Unfortunately the fruit is not as juicy nor quite as flavorful as its dark-fruited cousin (p. 169). There is also a purple aronia, somewhere between the red and black aronia in most characteristics-and indeed, many taxonomists recognize it as no more than a hybrid between them. AKA red chokeberry. The chokeberries are placed in the genera Photinia, Aronia, Sorbus, and Pyrus by various taxonomists. 151 