17
Yaupon llex vomitoria Aquifoliaceae (Holly family)
QUICK CHECK: Evergreen holly with tiny, blunt-toothed, non-prickly, alternate leaves
and red small tree 7-25' (2-8 m) tall, usually with thickets. multiple Bark stems is
berries. ID difficulty 3.
DESCRIPTION: Large shrub or of often twisted branches, often forming stiff, hairy
from the base smooth. and a dense Branches crown spread at broad angles, about 80°. Twigs feel. very Leaves almost
at pale first gray but and with age becoming the twigs hairless and smallest and slightly branches rough for with 14-20" a waxy (36-50 cm) back Blades from are the thick tip. and They tough, are
evenly distributed along cm) long, elliptic, blunt at the base and tip. when young).
alternate, flat not to in plane, wavy, 0.5-1.6" paler (1.3-4 below, generally hairless (except along the top forward-pointing of the midvein teeth, each
smooth, slightly Margins down-rolled with a few, widely spaced, (late spring) on
Veins protrude with above a and bristle. below. Petioles reddish, 3-5% of blade length, not channeled. Flowers united petals, whitish
tooth blunt directly tiny from the twigs, 4-6 mm across with a 4-5 lobed calyx and 4-5 containing mul-
short pedicels Berry spherical, 4-6 mm, bright red with yellow-orange pulp (not edible!) of its diameter.
tiple green seeds, to creamy. borne singly but sometimes densely, directly from twigs on a stiff stem about 1/3
Seeds usually 4, shaped like a broken crescent, tan and faintly striped.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Other hollies either have pointed teeth or no teeth.
HABITAT: Coastal dunes, low woods, flatwoods, roadsides; dry, open hill country in Texas.
FOOD USE: Gather and dry the leaves and brew like green tea. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is one of the few plants native to North America that contains caffeine. It is closely related
to maté, a popular drink in South America. There are a few commercial enterprises selling wild-harvested
yaupon leaves. Despite the Latin name, you can drink it in normal quantities without vomiting.
Yaupon berries are not edible!
152
17 Yaupon llex vomitoria Aquifoliaceae (Holly family) QUICK CHECK: Evergreen holly with tiny, blunt-toothed, non-prickly, alternate leaves and red small tree 7-25' (2-8 m) tall, usually with thickets. multiple Bark stems is berries. ID difficulty 3. DESCRIPTION: Large shrub or of often twisted branches, often forming stiff, hairy from the base smooth. and a dense Branches crown spread at broad angles, about 80°. Twigs feel. very Leaves almost at pale first gray but and with age becoming the twigs hairless and smallest and slightly branches rough for with 14-20" a waxy (36-50 cm) back Blades from are the thick tip. and They tough, are evenly distributed along cm) long, elliptic, blunt at the base and tip. when young). alternate, flat not to in plane, wavy, 0.5-1.6" paler (1.3-4 below, generally hairless (except along the top forward-pointing of the midvein teeth, each smooth, slightly Margins down-rolled with a few, widely spaced, (late spring) on Veins protrude with above a and bristle. below. Petioles reddish, 3-5% of blade length, not channeled. Flowers united petals, whitish tooth blunt directly tiny from the twigs, 4-6 mm across with a 4-5 lobed calyx and 4-5 containing mul- short pedicels Berry spherical, 4-6 mm, bright red with yellow-orange pulp (not edible!) of its diameter. tiple green seeds, to creamy. borne singly but sometimes densely, directly from twigs on a stiff stem about 1/3 Seeds usually 4, shaped like a broken crescent, tan and faintly striped. CONFUSING PLANTS: Other hollies either have pointed teeth or no teeth. HABITAT: Coastal dunes, low woods, flatwoods, roadsides; dry, open hill country in Texas. FOOD USE: Gather and dry the leaves and brew like green tea. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is one of the few plants native to North America that contains caffeine. It is closely related to maté, a popular drink in South America. There are a few commercial enterprises selling wild-harvested yaupon leaves. Despite the Latin name, you can drink it in normal quantities without vomiting. Yaupon berries are not edible! 152 