BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED
2 Silverberry
1
Elaeagnus commutata
family Elaeagnaceae
silvery UICK scales; CHECK: fruits Colonial silver-green. thornless ID shrub difficulty with 1. alternate, entire leaves
DESCRIPTION: extensive colonies Shrub 3-8' (1-2.5 m) tall, spreading by suckers to form
generally less that appear silver-gray from a distance. Stems not loose but often
branches short. than 1" (2.5 cm) thick. The form is taller than wide with clumped, eract
stretch marks Bark gray-brown and generally smooth but peeling erratically a narrow with crown, the
scales that fade and scattered transverse lenticels. Twigs red-brown, densely covered random
(1,5-9 cm) long-the to gray in the second year. Leaves simple, alternate, hairless, highly variable with shiny, in size darker TERMI
almost smaller leaves are elliptic and blunt, the larger ones ovate and pointed. The 6-3,
velvety below, covered with reflective scales that are silvery above, silver and reddish the surface soft
Margins above. entire and downcurved. Midvein slightly depressed above; secondary veins flat or: to SI underside
Petioles 5% of blade length, broadly and shallowly channeled. Inflorescence small clusters ght from
axils. Flowers (early summer) with a tubular base 7-9 mm long and four yellow sepal lobes (which look 11'm eat
petals). Fruit (late summer) slightly oblong to spherical, 12-14 mm long, dimpled at both ends, dull gray green
the sides sometimes ridged, on a pedicel 20% of its length. The surface is slightly bumpy and not glossy. Heyh
is dry, powdery-spongy, and greenish. Seed single, large, leathery, football-shaped, ridged and striped lengthwise
CONFUSING PLANTS: Russian-olive (p. 105) has much narrower leaves and grows to tree size; the
smaller but similar.
HABITAT: Forest edges, stream banks, meadows, thickets, sparse woods, brushy prairies, and other surry
situations. Native.
FOOD USE: The berries ripen in late summer or early fall and are dry, mealy, and somewhat astringent, much
like those of Russian-olive. They can be eaten raw but few people find them appealing; they are better cooked.
strained, and mixed with other fruit. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Not well known, not well liked, but often available in great quantity for anybody who wants a
bland mealy fruit almost as good as a Russian-olive. The seeds are sometimes dried and used for necklace
beads or pea-shooter projectiles. AKA wolfberry.
The silvery toliage stands
155
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED 2 Silverberry 1 Elaeagnus commutata family Elaeagnaceae silvery UICK scales; CHECK: fruits Colonial silver-green. thornless ID shrub difficulty with 1. alternate, entire leaves DESCRIPTION: extensive colonies Shrub 3-8' (1-2.5 m) tall, spreading by suckers to form generally less that appear silver-gray from a distance. Stems not loose but often branches short. than 1" (2.5 cm) thick. The form is taller than wide with clumped, eract stretch marks Bark gray-brown and generally smooth but peeling erratically a narrow with crown, the scales that fade and scattered transverse lenticels. Twigs red-brown, densely covered random (1,5-9 cm) long-the to gray in the second year. Leaves simple, alternate, hairless, highly variable with shiny, in size darker TERMI almost smaller leaves are elliptic and blunt, the larger ones ovate and pointed. The 6-3, velvety below, covered with reflective scales that are silvery above, silver and reddish the surface soft Margins above. entire and downcurved. Midvein slightly depressed above; secondary veins flat or: to SI underside Petioles 5% of blade length, broadly and shallowly channeled. Inflorescence small clusters ght from axils. Flowers (early summer) with a tubular base 7-9 mm long and four yellow sepal lobes (which look 11'm eat petals). Fruit (late summer) slightly oblong to spherical, 12-14 mm long, dimpled at both ends, dull gray green the sides sometimes ridged, on a pedicel 20% of its length. The surface is slightly bumpy and not glossy. Heyh is dry, powdery-spongy, and greenish. Seed single, large, leathery, football-shaped, ridged and striped lengthwise CONFUSING PLANTS: Russian-olive (p. 105) has much narrower leaves and grows to tree size; the smaller but similar. HABITAT: Forest edges, stream banks, meadows, thickets, sparse woods, brushy prairies, and other surry situations. Native. FOOD USE: The berries ripen in late summer or early fall and are dry, mealy, and somewhat astringent, much like those of Russian-olive. They can be eaten raw but few people find them appealing; they are better cooked. strained, and mixed with other fruit. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Not well known, not well liked, but often available in great quantity for anybody who wants a bland mealy fruit almost as good as a Russian-olive. The seeds are sometimes dried and used for necklace beads or pea-shooter projectiles. AKA wolfberry. The silvery toliage stands 155 