Deerberry
2
1
(Heath
family)
Vaccinium stamineum
Ericaceae
Branchy erect shrub with alternate, entire, difficulty blunt leaves; 1. dangling
spherical leaning, much branched shrub 3-8' (1-2.5 m) Twigs tall, very the
QUICK CHECK: greenish fruit in clusters with miniature leaves. ID
DESCRIPTION: Spreading to of older stems peels in thin brown strips. buds of leafy
branches almost horizontal. the buds of Bark flowering branches notably plumper than (rarely the with a few
thin, shoots. minutely Leaves the hairy, base), alternate. broadly thin elliptic but leathery, to obovate, bluish-white the base beneath, heart-shaped entire to new rounded, branches the there tips blunt-pointed are 2-4 miniature to
teeth near 3" (8 cm) long, but at the base of below, especially
rounded. The On blades branch are tips hairless the leaves above are except up to on the midvein, hairy on the margins, and veins hairy are angled 50-70°.
leaves. veins. Veins (including the midvein) lightly depressed above; secondary a raceme of 3-8, interrupted
on major broadly channeled, minutely hairy. Inflorescence branches.
Petioles leaves; 2-5% there of blade may length, also be single flowers hanging from the axils of larger leaves on flowering triangular corolla
by tiny bell-like, drooping, 5 mm across, with a small green 5-lobed calyx, 5 spreading roughly
Flowers and protruding dull orange stamens tightly packed around a style protruding twice as far. Berry the fruit's
spherical, lobes, 10 mm in diameter with a calyx at the end, hanging on a thin pedicel slightly longer than odor.
diameter. It 5-13 ripens to green, yellow, or occasionally reddish in late summer and develops an odd musky
The skin is thick and tough with nearly colorless pulp inside, containing many soft seeds. Some populations
in the Deep South have purple-black fruit on much tailer bushes.
HABITAT: Dry woods in moderate shade, especially
under hickory, oak, and pine. Common on rock out-
crops and poor soil. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather berries in late summer or autumn
by hand. They can be eaten fresh or dried, and used in
jams, pies, and preserves. The skins are tougher than
blueberry skins, 50 you may want to run these through
a fruit strainer. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This common and widespread berry is
often disdained because it is not like the blueberries
to which it is closely related-but some people enjoy
its unique flavor. This plant is highly variable in size,
Despite being green, these deerberries are ripe,
pubescence, and fruit color across its range and has
been given a number of names and divided into several
subspecies. It is so different from other blueberries
that some have placed it in its own genus, Polycodium.
AKA squaw huckleberry in older literature.
154
Deerberry 2 1 (Heath family) Vaccinium stamineum Ericaceae Branchy erect shrub with alternate, entire, difficulty blunt leaves; 1. dangling spherical leaning, much branched shrub 3-8' (1-2.5 m) Twigs tall, very the QUICK CHECK: greenish fruit in clusters with miniature leaves. ID DESCRIPTION: Spreading to of older stems peels in thin brown strips. buds of leafy branches almost horizontal. the buds of Bark flowering branches notably plumper than (rarely the with a few thin, shoots. minutely Leaves the hairy, base), alternate. broadly thin elliptic but leathery, to obovate, bluish-white the base beneath, heart-shaped entire to new rounded, branches the there tips blunt-pointed are 2-4 miniature to teeth near 3" (8 cm) long, but at the base of below, especially rounded. The On blades branch are tips hairless the leaves above are except up to on the midvein, hairy on the margins, and veins hairy are angled 50-70°. leaves. veins. Veins (including the midvein) lightly depressed above; secondary a raceme of 3-8, interrupted on major broadly channeled, minutely hairy. Inflorescence branches. Petioles leaves; 2-5% there of blade may length, also be single flowers hanging from the axils of larger leaves on flowering triangular corolla by tiny bell-like, drooping, 5 mm across, with a small green 5-lobed calyx, 5 spreading roughly Flowers and protruding dull orange stamens tightly packed around a style protruding twice as far. Berry the fruit's spherical, lobes, 10 mm in diameter with a calyx at the end, hanging on a thin pedicel slightly longer than odor. diameter. It 5-13 ripens to green, yellow, or occasionally reddish in late summer and develops an odd musky The skin is thick and tough with nearly colorless pulp inside, containing many soft seeds. Some populations in the Deep South have purple-black fruit on much tailer bushes. HABITAT: Dry woods in moderate shade, especially under hickory, oak, and pine. Common on rock out- crops and poor soil. Native. FOOD USE: Gather berries in late summer or autumn by hand. They can be eaten fresh or dried, and used in jams, pies, and preserves. The skins are tougher than blueberry skins, 50 you may want to run these through a fruit strainer. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This common and widespread berry is often disdained because it is not like the blueberries to which it is closely related-but some people enjoy its unique flavor. This plant is highly variable in size, Despite being green, these deerberries are ripe, pubescence, and fruit color across its range and has been given a number of names and divided into several subspecies. It is so different from other blueberries that some have placed it in its own genus, Polycodium. AKA squaw huckleberry in older literature. 154 