3
Red-osier dogwood
1
Cornus stolonifera
family Cornaceae
QUICK CHECK: Clump-forming shrub with paired, entire leaves, reddish or green bark,
and clusters of soft white berries. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Clumping shrub 5-12' (1.5-4 m) tall, sometimes spreading by layering. bright
Stems 0.5-2" (1.3-5 cm) in diameter, erect. Bark smooth, yellow to green in summer, or
red in winter, with scattered, light-colored, raised corky lenticels. New growth is green to
covered with short hair, often angled. Leaves simple, paired, entire, ovate
elliptic, red, densely 2-4" (5-10 cm) long, the bases angled and the tips pointed, both surfaces with fine appressed
Veins strongly depressed above and protruding below; secondary veins arch toward the tip, running just i
the margin. Petioles 18-25% of blade length, reddish, channeled, fine-hairy. Inflorescence a dense, flat-to
to rounded cluster (cyme) of 30-140. This shrub blooms twice per growing season-once in spring and
in midsummer as the fruit from the first flowers is ripening. Flowers 5 mm across with 4 sharp-tipped, o
white petais and 4 protruding stamens. Berries spherical, 5-8 mm, white, smooth-skinned, with a rem
protruding style. The juicy flesh contains one seed. Ripens in both mid summer and fall.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Silky dogwood C. amomum often has
reddish stems, but it has less glossy bark and its berries ripen
to blue.
HABITAT: Low, wet, or poorly drained ground in full to partial
sun, such as shrub swamps, lake edges, marshes, ditches, sunny
streamsides, and flat areas of clay soil. Native.
FOOD USE: The berries ripen in mid to late summer and can
be eaten fresh but are bitter. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is one of the most widespread and abundant
shrubs in North America, being especially common in the North.
Like Canada buffaloberry, the fruit is bitter and unpalatable to most
who try it. After having nibbled these occasionally over the years
I have grown to enjoy them in small quantities. Like beer, it is an
acquired taste; unlike beer, there are no country songs about it.
156
3 Red-osier dogwood 1 Cornus stolonifera family Cornaceae QUICK CHECK: Clump-forming shrub with paired, entire leaves, reddish or green bark, and clusters of soft white berries. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Clumping shrub 5-12' (1.5-4 m) tall, sometimes spreading by layering. bright Stems 0.5-2" (1.3-5 cm) in diameter, erect. Bark smooth, yellow to green in summer, or red in winter, with scattered, light-colored, raised corky lenticels. New growth is green to covered with short hair, often angled. Leaves simple, paired, entire, ovate elliptic, red, densely 2-4" (5-10 cm) long, the bases angled and the tips pointed, both surfaces with fine appressed Veins strongly depressed above and protruding below; secondary veins arch toward the tip, running just i the margin. Petioles 18-25% of blade length, reddish, channeled, fine-hairy. Inflorescence a dense, flat-to to rounded cluster (cyme) of 30-140. This shrub blooms twice per growing season-once in spring and in midsummer as the fruit from the first flowers is ripening. Flowers 5 mm across with 4 sharp-tipped, o white petais and 4 protruding stamens. Berries spherical, 5-8 mm, white, smooth-skinned, with a rem protruding style. The juicy flesh contains one seed. Ripens in both mid summer and fall. CONFUSING PLANTS: Silky dogwood C. amomum often has reddish stems, but it has less glossy bark and its berries ripen to blue. HABITAT: Low, wet, or poorly drained ground in full to partial sun, such as shrub swamps, lake edges, marshes, ditches, sunny streamsides, and flat areas of clay soil. Native. FOOD USE: The berries ripen in mid to late summer and can be eaten fresh but are bitter. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is one of the most widespread and abundant shrubs in North America, being especially common in the North. Like Canada buffaloberry, the fruit is bitter and unpalatable to most who try it. After having nibbled these occasionally over the years I have grown to enjoy them in small quantities. Like beer, it is an acquired taste; unlike beer, there are no country songs about it. 156 