0
BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED
4
Black haws
2
FH-311
genus
Viburnum
(in
part)
family Adoxaceae
fruit QUICK with CHECK: Paired, unlobed leaves and cymes of elliptic, black, pulpy (not juicy)
a single flattened seed. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Large shrubs forming thickets, or small trees to 25' (8 m)
multiple erect trunks, often spreading by suckers. When invading sunny locations tall, these with
plants are often shrubby; in moderate competition they are more likely to have single
trunks and be tree-like. Bark of young stems dark brown and smooth with a thin, peeling
cuticle and scattered brown lenticels; older bark composed of small dark gray plates or
blocks separated by narrow fissures. Leaves paired, simple, unlobed, broadly elliptic to
lanceolate or obovate, smooth above, the margins finely toothed. Petioles 5-20% of blade
Composite
length, often with a winged or bumpy margin. Infiorescence (late spring or early summer)
range.
a flat-topped crowded cluster (cyme) of 12-40 flowers 2-5" (5-13 across. Flowers 5 mm across, bell-like,
white, with 5 triangular lobes, 5 protruding stamens, and a single 3-lobed stigma. Fruit slightly oblong to nearly
spherical, 0.3-0.6" (8-15 mm) long, black when ripe, sometimes coated with bloom, smooth at first but soon
becoming wrinkly, the flesh pulpy but not juicy, containing a single large, flattened, leathery, oval seed (like a
watermelon seed). The berries ripen in fall, in drooping clusters with reddish pedicels.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Arrowwoods (closely related) are smaller shrubs with smaller, extremely bitter fruit
in smaller clusters. Their teeth are larger and more prominent and have secondary veins terminating in them.
You will not be harmed by tasting an arrowwood berry, but stop there.
HABITAT: Open woods, forest edges, swamp margins, brushy areas, river floodplains, steep slopes-in a
variety of soil conditions. See individual species for specifics. All species are native.
FOOD USE: Gather berries in fall when they are black and soft; the clusters make them easy to pick in quan-
tity. They can be eaten raw, or they can be simmered in a small amount of water and run through a strainer
to separate the pulp from the seeds. The flavor is uniquely sweet and reminiscent of a mixture of prunes and
bananas. The pulp can be dried as fruit leather or used in quick breads like mashed banana. It can also be
used as the base for non-jelled fruit spreads.
COMMENTS: All of these have good fruit that is similar but not identical in flavor. The group is easy to identify,
but the species can be somewhat tricky. It is not vital to know which kind of black haw you are eating. These to
berries often crop heavily in full sun. Black haws are among the last wild berries to ripen. They are easy
grow and well worth planting or encouraging for wildlife and human food.
Species:
Viburnum lentago
Nannyberry 2.5-5" (6-13 cm) long, hairless on both sides, the tips pointed, irregularly the margins winged. finely The
This plant has ovate leaves nipple tips. The petioles are conspicuously but on river
toothed, the teeth with like a extended bird's beak. Nannyberry likes moist to mesic rows, rich soil and and roadsides. is most common It has the largest
buds floodplains, are elongated shrubby wetland margins, forest edges, old fields, Flower fence bud.
leaves, fruit, and fruit clusters of the black haw group.
0 BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED 4 Black haws 2 FH-311 genus Viburnum (in part) family Adoxaceae fruit QUICK with CHECK: Paired, unlobed leaves and cymes of elliptic, black, pulpy (not juicy) a single flattened seed. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Large shrubs forming thickets, or small trees to 25' (8 m) multiple erect trunks, often spreading by suckers. When invading sunny locations tall, these with plants are often shrubby; in moderate competition they are more likely to have single trunks and be tree-like. Bark of young stems dark brown and smooth with a thin, peeling cuticle and scattered brown lenticels; older bark composed of small dark gray plates or blocks separated by narrow fissures. Leaves paired, simple, unlobed, broadly elliptic to lanceolate or obovate, smooth above, the margins finely toothed. Petioles 5-20% of blade Composite length, often with a winged or bumpy margin. Infiorescence (late spring or early summer) range. a flat-topped crowded cluster (cyme) of 12-40 flowers 2-5" (5-13 across. Flowers 5 mm across, bell-like, white, with 5 triangular lobes, 5 protruding stamens, and a single 3-lobed stigma. Fruit slightly oblong to nearly spherical, 0.3-0.6" (8-15 mm) long, black when ripe, sometimes coated with bloom, smooth at first but soon becoming wrinkly, the flesh pulpy but not juicy, containing a single large, flattened, leathery, oval seed (like a watermelon seed). The berries ripen in fall, in drooping clusters with reddish pedicels. CONFUSING PLANTS: Arrowwoods (closely related) are smaller shrubs with smaller, extremely bitter fruit in smaller clusters. Their teeth are larger and more prominent and have secondary veins terminating in them. You will not be harmed by tasting an arrowwood berry, but stop there. HABITAT: Open woods, forest edges, swamp margins, brushy areas, river floodplains, steep slopes-in a variety of soil conditions. See individual species for specifics. All species are native. FOOD USE: Gather berries in fall when they are black and soft; the clusters make them easy to pick in quan- tity. They can be eaten raw, or they can be simmered in a small amount of water and run through a strainer to separate the pulp from the seeds. The flavor is uniquely sweet and reminiscent of a mixture of prunes and bananas. The pulp can be dried as fruit leather or used in quick breads like mashed banana. It can also be used as the base for non-jelled fruit spreads. COMMENTS: All of these have good fruit that is similar but not identical in flavor. The group is easy to identify, but the species can be somewhat tricky. It is not vital to know which kind of black haw you are eating. These to berries often crop heavily in full sun. Black haws are among the last wild berries to ripen. They are easy grow and well worth planting or encouraging for wildlife and human food. Species: Viburnum lentago Nannyberry 2.5-5" (6-13 cm) long, hairless on both sides, the tips pointed, irregularly the margins winged. finely The This plant has ovate leaves nipple tips. The petioles are conspicuously but on river toothed, the teeth with like a extended bird's beak. Nannyberry likes moist to mesic rows, rich soil and and roadsides. is most common It has the largest buds floodplains, are elongated shrubby wetland margins, forest edges, old fields, Flower fence bud. leaves, fruit, and fruit clusters of the black haw group. 