5 Hobblebush
2
Viburnum alnifolium
family Adoxaceae
CHECK: Shrub with very large, nearly round, paired leaves 1. with prominently
depressed QUICK veins; dark fruit in clusters on pink stems. ID difficulty
Shrub 2-12' (0.6-3.7 m) tall, scattered or forming loose thickets. often Stems rooting to
1.5 (4 the cm) branches touch the ground. Bark thin, purplish-gray to brown, russet-cracked
DESCRIPTION: thick, not clumped, standing erect or leaning and nearly prostrate, with
scattered where lenticels, especially below-the larger of these raised as bumps. Twigs sparse hairs.
with scattered clumps of dense, cinnamon-brown
and thick. dark naked, purple-green, terminal, sometimes 2 or 3 clustered at the twig tips, woolly, yellowish to orange-brown, Leaves paired,
Buds large, (13-25 mm) long; parallel grooves from secondary veins are already visible in the bud. rounded with an
conspicuously 0.5-1" large, 4-10" (10-25 cm) long and nearly as wide, broadly ovate to nearly the
abruptly-pointed tip and a symmetrical, heart-shaped base. Both surfaces are soft-hairy at first, but top
eventually becomes hairless. Margins finely toothed. Petioles 6-12% of blade length, rounded, not channeled,
with short, clumpy, glandular hairs extending onto the midvein. Veins depressed above and protruding below;
the secondary veins are numerous and prominent. Inflorescence (late spring) a flat-topped cluster (cyme) 3-5"
(8-13 cm) across with 20-60 flowers, the outer ones larger and showy but lacking sexual parts. Flowers 3-4 mm
wide, white with 5 petals. Fruit oval, 6-9 mm long, smooth and shiny, red at first, ripening to black and very
soft with black pulp; pedicels woolly and pinkish. Seed somewhat flattened with a light groove and dark line
down each face-plumper than other viburnum seeds.
HABITAT: Wooded ravines and moist rocky slopes. Native.
FOOD USE: Collect berries in late summer to early autumn. The whole cluster does not ripen at once. These
are softer and juicier than black haws but harder to collect in quantity. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is one of our most distinctive and attractive shrubs. It is sometimes called moosewood.
Because striped maple is also sometimes called moosewood, and because striped maple and hobblebush
often grow together, some people have come up with the cockamamie idea that they are two genders of the
same plant. Um, no.
160
5 Hobblebush 2 Viburnum alnifolium family Adoxaceae CHECK: Shrub with very large, nearly round, paired leaves 1. with prominently depressed QUICK veins; dark fruit in clusters on pink stems. ID difficulty Shrub 2-12' (0.6-3.7 m) tall, scattered or forming loose thickets. often Stems rooting to 1.5 (4 the cm) branches touch the ground. Bark thin, purplish-gray to brown, russet-cracked DESCRIPTION: thick, not clumped, standing erect or leaning and nearly prostrate, with scattered where lenticels, especially below-the larger of these raised as bumps. Twigs sparse hairs. with scattered clumps of dense, cinnamon-brown and thick. dark naked, purple-green, terminal, sometimes 2 or 3 clustered at the twig tips, woolly, yellowish to orange-brown, Leaves paired, Buds large, (13-25 mm) long; parallel grooves from secondary veins are already visible in the bud. rounded with an conspicuously 0.5-1" large, 4-10" (10-25 cm) long and nearly as wide, broadly ovate to nearly the abruptly-pointed tip and a symmetrical, heart-shaped base. Both surfaces are soft-hairy at first, but top eventually becomes hairless. Margins finely toothed. Petioles 6-12% of blade length, rounded, not channeled, with short, clumpy, glandular hairs extending onto the midvein. Veins depressed above and protruding below; the secondary veins are numerous and prominent. Inflorescence (late spring) a flat-topped cluster (cyme) 3-5" (8-13 cm) across with 20-60 flowers, the outer ones larger and showy but lacking sexual parts. Flowers 3-4 mm wide, white with 5 petals. Fruit oval, 6-9 mm long, smooth and shiny, red at first, ripening to black and very soft with black pulp; pedicels woolly and pinkish. Seed somewhat flattened with a light groove and dark line down each face-plumper than other viburnum seeds. HABITAT: Wooded ravines and moist rocky slopes. Native. FOOD USE: Collect berries in late summer to early autumn. The whole cluster does not ripen at once. These are softer and juicier than black haws but harder to collect in quantity. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is one of our most distinctive and attractive shrubs. It is sometimes called moosewood. Because striped maple is also sometimes called moosewood, and because striped maple and hobblebush often grow together, some people have come up with the cockamamie idea that they are two genders of the same plant. Um, no. 160 