BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED
6
Chokecherry
2 LI FH-214
Prunus virginiana
Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK ID difficulty CHECK: 2. Shrub or small tree with purple-black, single-stone fruit in racemes.
DESCRIPTION: form small Large thornless shrub or small tree, often cloning by root
colonies. Trunks commonly 6-16' (2-5 m) tall but occasionally much suckers to
Bark dark gray with reddish brown lenticels, becoming shallowly grooved on older larger.
Twigs may be faintly hairy or hairless; buds are egg-shaped and pointed. Leaves alternate, trees.
1-4.3" (2.5-11 cm) long, elliptic or obovate (often widest just above the middle), the base broadly
nearly round, the tip abruptly pointed or short-acuminate. Surface hairless above; there is fuzz angled the to
major veins below. Veins depressed above and protruding below. Secondary veins at 55-70°, looping along forward
to connect with the next vein before reaching the margin. Margins finely serrated, the teeth for ward-pointed
and sharp with a nipple tip. Petioles 20% of blade length, channeled, often finely hairy, with a few large, often
paired, dark glands. Inflorescence an arching raceme 3-6" (8-15 cm) long of 12-26 flowers, the rachis green
when flowering but usually reddish by fruiting, often finely hairy. Flowers (late spring) about 8 mm across
with 5 separate, broad-tipped white petals and numerous stamens. Fruit spherical with no calyx, 7-10 mm,
on pedicels 70-90% of the fruit diameter, the juicy flesh containing a single large, oval pit. It ripens to purple-
black (occasionally red) in late summer to fall.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Glossy buckthorn (p. 661) has entire leaf margins and fruit hanging directly from
branches, with 2-3 seeds. Common buckthorn (p. 660) has thorns, and fruit like glossy buckthorn. Black cherry
(p. 101) has narrower, shinier leaves with flat veins above and fruit with a tiny calyx at the base.
HABITAT: Young woods, forest edges, open woodlands, fencerows, floodplains, roadsides. Native.
A
FOOD USE: Fully ripe fruit is black and detaches easily from its stem. These can be boiled and strained to
make juice or jelly. They can also be strained raw to remove the seeds and the pulp used for jam or fruit leather.
Chokecherries are traditionally pounded with the pits included and then fermented, cooked, or sun-dried
before eating. Raw kernels should not be eaten in large quantities.
COMMENTS: This is the most widespread North American tree or shrub producing edible fruit. The cherries
are often remarkably abundant and have been a staple food in some regions. As traditionally eaten, many
of the calories come
from the oil-rich pits.
Many white authors,
without adequate evi-
dence, warn against
this traditional use-
but clearly Native
Americans figured
out how to make the
seeds a wholesome
part of their food
supply.
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED 6 Chokecherry 2 LI FH-214 Prunus virginiana Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK ID difficulty CHECK: 2. Shrub or small tree with purple-black, single-stone fruit in racemes. DESCRIPTION: form small Large thornless shrub or small tree, often cloning by root colonies. Trunks commonly 6-16' (2-5 m) tall but occasionally much suckers to Bark dark gray with reddish brown lenticels, becoming shallowly grooved on older larger. Twigs may be faintly hairy or hairless; buds are egg-shaped and pointed. Leaves alternate, trees. 1-4.3" (2.5-11 cm) long, elliptic or obovate (often widest just above the middle), the base broadly nearly round, the tip abruptly pointed or short-acuminate. Surface hairless above; there is fuzz angled the to major veins below. Veins depressed above and protruding below. Secondary veins at 55-70°, looping along forward to connect with the next vein before reaching the margin. Margins finely serrated, the teeth for ward-pointed and sharp with a nipple tip. Petioles 20% of blade length, channeled, often finely hairy, with a few large, often paired, dark glands. Inflorescence an arching raceme 3-6" (8-15 cm) long of 12-26 flowers, the rachis green when flowering but usually reddish by fruiting, often finely hairy. Flowers (late spring) about 8 mm across with 5 separate, broad-tipped white petals and numerous stamens. Fruit spherical with no calyx, 7-10 mm, on pedicels 70-90% of the fruit diameter, the juicy flesh containing a single large, oval pit. It ripens to purple- black (occasionally red) in late summer to fall. CONFUSING PLANTS: Glossy buckthorn (p. 661) has entire leaf margins and fruit hanging directly from branches, with 2-3 seeds. Common buckthorn (p. 660) has thorns, and fruit like glossy buckthorn. Black cherry (p. 101) has narrower, shinier leaves with flat veins above and fruit with a tiny calyx at the base. HABITAT: Young woods, forest edges, open woodlands, fencerows, floodplains, roadsides. Native. A FOOD USE: Fully ripe fruit is black and detaches easily from its stem. These can be boiled and strained to make juice or jelly. They can also be strained raw to remove the seeds and the pulp used for jam or fruit leather. Chokecherries are traditionally pounded with the pits included and then fermented, cooked, or sun-dried before eating. Raw kernels should not be eaten in large quantities. COMMENTS: This is the most widespread North American tree or shrub producing edible fruit. The cherries are often remarkably abundant and have been a staple food in some regions. As traditionally eaten, many of the calories come from the oil-rich pits. Many white authors, without adequate evi- dence, warn against this traditional use- but clearly Native Americans figured out how to make the seeds a wholesome part of their food supply. 