7
Prunus Sandcherry pumila, P. susquehanae 2 NG-299 + Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK CHECK: Shrub with small, narrow leaves and purple-black fruit with a single
hard stone. ID difficulty 1.
Low shrubs 1-6' (30-180 cm) tall, smaller plants often laying prostrate Bark dark or
DESCRIPTION: stems weakly erect to leaning, the branches rather sparse.
with decumbent, light-colored, larger transverse, elongated lenticels, covered with a thin, light-colored
cuticle that tapered to the base and usually broader toward the tip, the blades often somewhat folded spaced, along
eventually flakes off. Leaves alternate, 1-2.2" (2.5-5.5 cm) long, oblanceolate
to elliptic, hairless on both sides. Veins and veinlets nearly flat above. Margins have small, widely blade
non-glandular the midvein, teeth (but the proximal quarter lacks teeth). Petioles channeled, reddish, 10-30% of
length. Inflorescence an umbel of 2-4 attached directly to the twig, usually at the base of a short, spur-like
branch. Flowers (late spring) 9-12 mm across with 5 broad, separate white petals, narrowed at the base, with
numerous stamens. Fruit spherical to slightly oblong, 0.3-0.7" (8-18 mm) long. ripening to dark purple-black,
with a single, large, hard stone.
SPECIES: There are two very similar species. P. pumilo grows larger and has narrower leaves; the cherries
are larger and taste better. it grows primarily on sandy prairies or savannahs and beaches. P. susquehanae
rarely exceeds knee-high and has broader leaves and smaller cherries that usually do not taste as good. It
сал be found in pine barrens but is also characteristic of sterile rocky slopes and hilltops. P. susquehanae
has minutely hairy twigs; P. pumila has
hairless twigs.
HABITAT: Beaches, sand dunes,
sandy prairies, pine and oak barrens.
Native.
FOOD USE: Gather cherries when
they are dark purple-black and soft.
They can be eaten fresh, pitted and
dried, or made into jam, jelly, juice, or
pie. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This has the largest
fruit of our wild cherries, but it is the
smallest plant. The flavor is highly vari-
able from one bush to another-the
best ones are delicious, but some are
quite astringent.
162
7 Prunus Sandcherry pumila, P. susquehanae 2 NG-299 + Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK CHECK: Shrub with small, narrow leaves and purple-black fruit with a single hard stone. ID difficulty 1. Low shrubs 1-6' (30-180 cm) tall, smaller plants often laying prostrate Bark dark or DESCRIPTION: stems weakly erect to leaning, the branches rather sparse. with decumbent, light-colored, larger transverse, elongated lenticels, covered with a thin, light-colored cuticle that tapered to the base and usually broader toward the tip, the blades often somewhat folded spaced, along eventually flakes off. Leaves alternate, 1-2.2" (2.5-5.5 cm) long, oblanceolate to elliptic, hairless on both sides. Veins and veinlets nearly flat above. Margins have small, widely blade non-glandular the midvein, teeth (but the proximal quarter lacks teeth). Petioles channeled, reddish, 10-30% of length. Inflorescence an umbel of 2-4 attached directly to the twig, usually at the base of a short, spur-like branch. Flowers (late spring) 9-12 mm across with 5 broad, separate white petals, narrowed at the base, with numerous stamens. Fruit spherical to slightly oblong, 0.3-0.7" (8-18 mm) long. ripening to dark purple-black, with a single, large, hard stone. SPECIES: There are two very similar species. P. pumilo grows larger and has narrower leaves; the cherries are larger and taste better. it grows primarily on sandy prairies or savannahs and beaches. P. susquehanae rarely exceeds knee-high and has broader leaves and smaller cherries that usually do not taste as good. It сал be found in pine barrens but is also characteristic of sterile rocky slopes and hilltops. P. susquehanae has minutely hairy twigs; P. pumila has hairless twigs. HABITAT: Beaches, sand dunes, sandy prairies, pine and oak barrens. Native. FOOD USE: Gather cherries when they are dark purple-black and soft. They can be eaten fresh, pitted and dried, or made into jam, jelly, juice, or pie. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This has the largest fruit of our wild cherries, but it is the smallest plant. The flavor is highly vari- able from one bush to another-the best ones are delicious, but some are quite astringent. 162 