BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED
8 Black elderberry
2
Sambucus canadensis
family
Adoxaceae
small QUICK CHECK: Shrub with pinnately compound leaves and broad ymes of numerous
5-petaled flowers followed by tiny, dark berries. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: tall Multi-stemmed shrub suckering to form colonies. Stems
hairless (occasionally taller in the South), weak, erect, with few branches. Twigs 4-15' 2-45 m)
and with thick white pith. Buds tiny-especially in proportion to the twigs. very Bark thick and
gray with scattered, raised, wart-like lenticels. Leaves paired, pinnately thin
14-22" (36-56 long, with 5-9 (usually 7) leaflets. Leaves are occasionally twice compound, compound,
branches that divide into 3 leaflets. Leaflets lanceolate to ovate, 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, the bases with e) few rachis
the tips long-pointed, often folded along the midvein, sessile or on short petiolules up to 10% of blade rounded and
The upper surface is nearly hairless; the underside usually has sparse hair along major veins. Midvein 3 length sedin
a gentle valley above, protruding below. Secondary veins 45°, arching toward the tip, faintly depressed above
Margins serrated with sharp, forward-pointing, claw-tipped teeth. Petiole channeled and green, the channel
becoming narrower distally. Inflorescence a flat-topped cluster (cyme) 4-10" (10-25 cm) across containing
dozens to a few hundred flowers. Flowers (early to mid summer) 4-7 mm across, with a tiny calyx, 3 recurved
white petals joined at the base, and 5 spreading stamens. Berries spherical, 5-6 mm, purple-black, containing
several small seeds, ripening mid to late summer.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Water hemlock (p. 668) could be confused in flower, but has a compound umber
rather than a cyme. Sambucus ebulus, a possibly toxic European elder that has been found at a very few sites
in North America, is herbaceous, typically just a few feet high, and has clusters of black berries pointing
skyward rather than drooping.
HABITAT: Rich, moist soil in full to partial sun. Common in ditches, fencerows, streamsides, floodplains,
pond margins, and barnyards. Native.
FOOD USE: Pick whole clusters of berries and remove from the stems with fingers or a fork, or by freezing
the whole clusters and smacking them inside a bucket. For juice, a steam juicer yields better flavor than boil-
ing. Drying whole fruit greatly improves the flavor. Elderberry is also a popular wine. Flowers are steeped
to make tea or thrown into fritters or other baked goods. Both flowers and fruit should be removed from the
stems, although small amounts of stem are harmless.
COMMENTS: Some botanists consider this to be the
same species as the European black elder S. nigra. In my
opinion the fresh fruit is only mediocre in flavor. but its
abundance makes it an attractive foraging option. Some
studies have shown elderberries reducing the symptoms
of influenza. AKA American elder.
WARNING: Elderberries cause gastric upset in some
individuals, particularly when raw and if the seeds are
ingested.
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED 8 Black elderberry 2 Sambucus canadensis family Adoxaceae small QUICK CHECK: Shrub with pinnately compound leaves and broad ymes of numerous 5-petaled flowers followed by tiny, dark berries. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: tall Multi-stemmed shrub suckering to form colonies. Stems hairless (occasionally taller in the South), weak, erect, with few branches. Twigs 4-15' 2-45 m) and with thick white pith. Buds tiny-especially in proportion to the twigs. very Bark thick and gray with scattered, raised, wart-like lenticels. Leaves paired, pinnately thin 14-22" (36-56 long, with 5-9 (usually 7) leaflets. Leaves are occasionally twice compound, compound, branches that divide into 3 leaflets. Leaflets lanceolate to ovate, 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, the bases with e) few rachis the tips long-pointed, often folded along the midvein, sessile or on short petiolules up to 10% of blade rounded and The upper surface is nearly hairless; the underside usually has sparse hair along major veins. Midvein 3 length sedin a gentle valley above, protruding below. Secondary veins 45°, arching toward the tip, faintly depressed above Margins serrated with sharp, forward-pointing, claw-tipped teeth. Petiole channeled and green, the channel becoming narrower distally. Inflorescence a flat-topped cluster (cyme) 4-10" (10-25 cm) across containing dozens to a few hundred flowers. Flowers (early to mid summer) 4-7 mm across, with a tiny calyx, 3 recurved white petals joined at the base, and 5 spreading stamens. Berries spherical, 5-6 mm, purple-black, containing several small seeds, ripening mid to late summer. CONFUSING PLANTS: Water hemlock (p. 668) could be confused in flower, but has a compound umber rather than a cyme. Sambucus ebulus, a possibly toxic European elder that has been found at a very few sites in North America, is herbaceous, typically just a few feet high, and has clusters of black berries pointing skyward rather than drooping. HABITAT: Rich, moist soil in full to partial sun. Common in ditches, fencerows, streamsides, floodplains, pond margins, and barnyards. Native. FOOD USE: Pick whole clusters of berries and remove from the stems with fingers or a fork, or by freezing the whole clusters and smacking them inside a bucket. For juice, a steam juicer yields better flavor than boil- ing. Drying whole fruit greatly improves the flavor. Elderberry is also a popular wine. Flowers are steeped to make tea or thrown into fritters or other baked goods. Both flowers and fruit should be removed from the stems, although small amounts of stem are harmless. COMMENTS: Some botanists consider this to be the same species as the European black elder S. nigra. In my opinion the fresh fruit is only mediocre in flavor. but its abundance makes it an attractive foraging option. Some studies have shown elderberries reducing the symptoms of influenza. AKA American elder. WARNING: Elderberries cause gastric upset in some individuals, particularly when raw and if the seeds are ingested. 