9
Gooseberry
3
IWE-129
Ribes (in part)
genus Grossulariaceae (Gooseberry family)
GROUP ID: Thorny shrubs with alternate or soft tufted, seeds. palmately ID difficulty lobed 1. leaves;
QUICK berries contain numerous small,
dangling spherical Multi-stemmed, clump-forming shrubs 2.5-8' (75-245 stems cm) tall, are
GROUP the stems DESCRIPTION: with scattered needle-like bristles stems and are stout erect spines but at outer, the nodes. older Main stems arch and
sometimes dominant and root the darker at the branches tips. brown Bark short; bark light below new and thin on older on new stems. growth. Leaves peeling alternate in papery palmate on lengthwise new lobes, growth, the sinuses clumped between on older
tipped. strips them depressed to often Surfaces reveal above channeled. deep hairy and protrude on Flowers both sides (late below. (but spring Petioles variably to early 60-100% so); base summer) major with of veins 3-5 5-¹⁰ blade major mm length, long.
wood. Blades are but notched narrow, or heart-shaped each major lobe at the cut into large teeth are or strongly sub-lobes, the teeth blunt and nipple-
grooved or or in small, short-stalked umbels of up to 3. with a pair of tiny bracts on
single each pedicel. Calyx tubular, splitting at the end into 5 greenish-white reflexed In the
lobes. Petals 5, smaller and hard to see. whitish. projecting forward.
center is a cluster of parallel stamens, not spreading, and projecting at least
slightly past the petais. Berries spherical, 0.3-0.6" (8-15 mm). the skin tough
and often partly translucent, lined lengthwise. with beak-like dried flower
remnants projecting from the end; pulpy-juicy and faintly purplish to dark
purple. containing numerous small seeds and not detaching readily from the
pedicel when ripe in mid to late summer.
HABITAT: Forest openings, swamps, rocky slopes, brushy areas. pastures.
All species native.
FOOD USE: Gather berries when soft and purple and eat them fresh or
cooked. The stems, skins, and dried flower parts are tough and best strained
out. Clean pulp is great for pies, jam, or fruit leather. and combines well with
milder fruits. Nearly-ripe green fruit can be mixed with
Missouri gooseberry R. missouriense.
water. blended, and strained to make a lemonade-like
drink. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Gooseberries are common and all species
have good flavor-they are not nearly as variable as their
cousins the currants. Because gooseberries are alternate
hosts of white pine blister rust there was a concerted
effort for several decades to eliminate them, resulting
in the destruction of millions of bushes. They have been
exterminated from some large sections of public forest
and Later it was realized that this didn't do much to help
the white pines because the spores can travel long dis-
tances on the wind A few of the more common species
are photographed here.
164
Northern gooseberry R oxyacontholdes
Prickly gooseberry k /nosbati
9 Gooseberry 3 IWE-129 Ribes (in part) genus Grossulariaceae (Gooseberry family) GROUP ID: Thorny shrubs with alternate or soft tufted, seeds. palmately ID difficulty lobed 1. leaves; QUICK berries contain numerous small, dangling spherical Multi-stemmed, clump-forming shrubs 2.5-8' (75-245 stems cm) tall, are GROUP the stems DESCRIPTION: with scattered needle-like bristles stems and are stout erect spines but at outer, the nodes. older Main stems arch and sometimes dominant and root the darker at the branches tips. brown Bark short; bark light below new and thin on older on new stems. growth. Leaves peeling alternate in papery palmate on lengthwise new lobes, growth, the sinuses clumped between on older tipped. strips them depressed to often Surfaces reveal above channeled. deep hairy and protrude on Flowers both sides (late below. (but spring Petioles variably to early 60-100% so); base summer) major with of veins 3-5 5-¹⁰ blade major mm length, long. wood. Blades are but notched narrow, or heart-shaped each major lobe at the cut into large teeth are or strongly sub-lobes, the teeth blunt and nipple- grooved or or in small, short-stalked umbels of up to 3. with a pair of tiny bracts on single each pedicel. Calyx tubular, splitting at the end into 5 greenish-white reflexed In the lobes. Petals 5, smaller and hard to see. whitish. projecting forward. center is a cluster of parallel stamens, not spreading, and projecting at least slightly past the petais. Berries spherical, 0.3-0.6" (8-15 mm). the skin tough and often partly translucent, lined lengthwise. with beak-like dried flower remnants projecting from the end; pulpy-juicy and faintly purplish to dark purple. containing numerous small seeds and not detaching readily from the pedicel when ripe in mid to late summer. HABITAT: Forest openings, swamps, rocky slopes, brushy areas. pastures. All species native. FOOD USE: Gather berries when soft and purple and eat them fresh or cooked. The stems, skins, and dried flower parts are tough and best strained out. Clean pulp is great for pies, jam, or fruit leather. and combines well with milder fruits. Nearly-ripe green fruit can be mixed with Missouri gooseberry R. missouriense. water. blended, and strained to make a lemonade-like drink. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Gooseberries are common and all species have good flavor-they are not nearly as variable as their cousins the currants. Because gooseberries are alternate hosts of white pine blister rust there was a concerted effort for several decades to eliminate them, resulting in the destruction of millions of bushes. They have been exterminated from some large sections of public forest and Later it was realized that this didn't do much to help the white pines because the spores can travel long dis- tances on the wind A few of the more common species are photographed here. 164 Northern gooseberry R oxyacontholdes Prickly gooseberry k /nosbati 