BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED
10 American black currant
2
Ribes americanum
Grossulariaceae (Gooseberry family)
QUICK CHECK: Unarmed chest-high shrub with palmately lobed leaves and hanzing
lusters of dark fruit. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Multi-stemmed, clump-forming shrub to 5' (1.5 m) tall. Stems erect at
first, often leaning or arching later, unarmed, bearing few branches, with 3-ungled and finely
hairy twigs. Bark smooth red-brown with light brown papery ridges. Leaves alternate on
new shoots, tufted on older growth, 0.6-2.8" (1.5-7 cm) long, palmately 3 or 5 lobed, the
lobes pointed. Blades nearly hairless above and sparsely hairy below, the hairs concentrated in major veir
axils; there are numerous yellow gland-dots, especially on the underside. Veins strongly depressed above and
protruding below. Margins doubly toothed; leaves on new growth have ciliate margins. Petioles 80 100% of
blade length and channeled. Petioles of the smaller leaves in each tuft have broad sheaths with ciliate margins
Inflorescence a drooping raceme of 5-9, the pedicels shorter than the flowers, each with a lanceolate bract
Flowers bell-shaped, 7-9 mm long, light yellow, with 5 reflexed sepals and 5 smaller, overlapping, for ward
pointing petals. Berries spherical, 6-9 mm, black, with a smooth, glossy surface except for the dried calyx at
the end, each containing multiple soft seeds, ripening mid to late summer.
HABITAT: Moist soil in full to partial sun; stream banks, lakeshores, moist meadows, clearings, fencerows
low spots in woods. More common in rich agricultural soil than other currants. Native.
FOOD USE: Berries can be eaten fresh, strained and used for fruit leather or jam (best mixed with milder
fruit), or made into juice or jelly. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Easier to gather than many other currants, but not the best in flavor, tending somewhat too
tart for most palates. The leaves of American black currant lack the powerful musky scent that characterizes
its European counterpart.
RELATED EDIBLES: Northern black currant R. hudsonianum tends to be shorter and has musky-smelling
leaves. It is found through the boreal forest region, preferring moist soil, and is usually associated with conifers
Bristly black currant R. lacustre is a small species of boreal forests. Unlike other currants it has very bristly
stems. The fruit is covered with glandular hairs.
165
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED 10 American black currant 2 Ribes americanum Grossulariaceae (Gooseberry family) QUICK CHECK: Unarmed chest-high shrub with palmately lobed leaves and hanzing lusters of dark fruit. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Multi-stemmed, clump-forming shrub to 5' (1.5 m) tall. Stems erect at first, often leaning or arching later, unarmed, bearing few branches, with 3-ungled and finely hairy twigs. Bark smooth red-brown with light brown papery ridges. Leaves alternate on new shoots, tufted on older growth, 0.6-2.8" (1.5-7 cm) long, palmately 3 or 5 lobed, the lobes pointed. Blades nearly hairless above and sparsely hairy below, the hairs concentrated in major veir axils; there are numerous yellow gland-dots, especially on the underside. Veins strongly depressed above and protruding below. Margins doubly toothed; leaves on new growth have ciliate margins. Petioles 80 100% of blade length and channeled. Petioles of the smaller leaves in each tuft have broad sheaths with ciliate margins Inflorescence a drooping raceme of 5-9, the pedicels shorter than the flowers, each with a lanceolate bract Flowers bell-shaped, 7-9 mm long, light yellow, with 5 reflexed sepals and 5 smaller, overlapping, for ward pointing petals. Berries spherical, 6-9 mm, black, with a smooth, glossy surface except for the dried calyx at the end, each containing multiple soft seeds, ripening mid to late summer. HABITAT: Moist soil in full to partial sun; stream banks, lakeshores, moist meadows, clearings, fencerows low spots in woods. More common in rich agricultural soil than other currants. Native. FOOD USE: Berries can be eaten fresh, strained and used for fruit leather or jam (best mixed with milder fruit), or made into juice or jelly. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Easier to gather than many other currants, but not the best in flavor, tending somewhat too tart for most palates. The leaves of American black currant lack the powerful musky scent that characterizes its European counterpart. RELATED EDIBLES: Northern black currant R. hudsonianum tends to be shorter and has musky-smelling leaves. It is found through the boreal forest region, preferring moist soil, and is usually associated with conifers Bristly black currant R. lacustre is a small species of boreal forests. Unlike other currants it has very bristly stems. The fruit is covered with glandular hairs. 165 