BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED
11 currant
Buffalo Ribes odoratum Grossulariaceae 3 (Gooseberry family)
Unarmed clamped shrub with alternate or tufted, difficulty shiny, 1. palmately
lobed QUICK leaves CHECK: and hanging racemes of spherical black berries. ID
Clumped, unarmed shrub 3-6' (1-2 m) tall, often forming light thickets. yellow-
DESCRIPTION: and erect at first, leaning to arching with age. New twigs eventually are hairless
brown Stems and straight finely bark, hairy; finally older becoming branches dark and gray. stems Leaves become alternate ridged on new and growth, but on deep, older narrow wood they sinuses, are tufted each
from peeling broadly fan-shaped with 3 palmate lobes separated by toothed along most
on short spurs. Blades tough, teeth (or small sub-lobes) toward the end, but otherwise not glossy dark
lobe with a few Surfaces large blunt of new leaves may be faintly hairy, but mature leaves are hairless, the top to slightly raised
of the margin. the bottom pale green-either side may be copiously gland-dotted or not at all. Veins flat Inflorescence a
green, protruding below. Petioles 80-100% of blade length, narrow and faintly hairy. (spring) bril-
above, slightly raceme (that looks like an umbel) of 5-11, interspersed with reduced leaves. Flowers the petal
liant compact yellow and highly fragrant, the thin tubular base twice the length of the 5 rounded calyx lobes,
tips in the center yellow at first turning
bright red. Stamens are shorter than
the petais and hidden. The raceme
lengthens in fruit and becomes no
longer umbel-like. Berry spherical,
7-12 mm, glossy and smooth, lined
lengthwise when almost ripe, with a
long beak of persistent flower parts at
the tip, ripening in mid to late summer
to purple-black and juicy with several
soft seeds.
HABITAT: Open, dry sites such as
forest edges, prairies, and hillsides.
Native, but often planted as an orna-
mental for its remarkable flowers.
FOOD USE: Gather these currants
by the handful and eat fresh or use
to make pies, jellies, jams, juice, or
wine. They can also be dried, and are
traditionally stored this way, It's best
to strain them to get rid of the thick
skins and flower remnants.
COMMENTS: This is perhaps the
best of North America's wild cur-
rants: large, juicy, prolific, easy to
collect and with excellent flavor It is
sometimes considered the same spe-
cies as the golden currant (R aureum)
of the Rock / Mountains, which may
have red, orange, yellow, or black fruit
whenripe
166
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED 11 currant Buffalo Ribes odoratum Grossulariaceae 3 (Gooseberry family) Unarmed clamped shrub with alternate or tufted, difficulty shiny, 1. palmately lobed QUICK leaves CHECK: and hanging racemes of spherical black berries. ID Clumped, unarmed shrub 3-6' (1-2 m) tall, often forming light thickets. yellow- DESCRIPTION: and erect at first, leaning to arching with age. New twigs eventually are hairless brown Stems and straight finely bark, hairy; finally older becoming branches dark and gray. stems Leaves become alternate ridged on new and growth, but on deep, older narrow wood they sinuses, are tufted each from peeling broadly fan-shaped with 3 palmate lobes separated by toothed along most on short spurs. Blades tough, teeth (or small sub-lobes) toward the end, but otherwise not glossy dark lobe with a few Surfaces large blunt of new leaves may be faintly hairy, but mature leaves are hairless, the top to slightly raised of the margin. the bottom pale green-either side may be copiously gland-dotted or not at all. Veins flat Inflorescence a green, protruding below. Petioles 80-100% of blade length, narrow and faintly hairy. (spring) bril- above, slightly raceme (that looks like an umbel) of 5-11, interspersed with reduced leaves. Flowers the petal liant compact yellow and highly fragrant, the thin tubular base twice the length of the 5 rounded calyx lobes, tips in the center yellow at first turning bright red. Stamens are shorter than the petais and hidden. The raceme lengthens in fruit and becomes no longer umbel-like. Berry spherical, 7-12 mm, glossy and smooth, lined lengthwise when almost ripe, with a long beak of persistent flower parts at the tip, ripening in mid to late summer to purple-black and juicy with several soft seeds. HABITAT: Open, dry sites such as forest edges, prairies, and hillsides. Native, but often planted as an orna- mental for its remarkable flowers. FOOD USE: Gather these currants by the handful and eat fresh or use to make pies, jellies, jams, juice, or wine. They can also be dried, and are traditionally stored this way, It's best to strain them to get rid of the thick skins and flower remnants. COMMENTS: This is perhaps the best of North America's wild cur- rants: large, juicy, prolific, easy to collect and with excellent flavor It is sometimes considered the same spe- cies as the golden currant (R aureum) of the Rock / Mountains, which may have red, orange, yellow, or black fruit whenripe 166 