BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED
12 Blue honeysuckle
3
Lonicera caerulaea
family Caprifoliaceae
QUICK CHECK: Knee-high shrub of bogs with paired, entire leaves and "two ayad"
blue berries. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Clump-forming or isolated shrub1-3.5' (30-100 cm) tall, the bark shredding
in grayish papery strips to reveal red-brown beneath. Sapwood is light green and aromatic,
as with other honeysuckles. Branches mostly erect, the angles narrow; twigs are purplish-
red at the nodes with long, soft, sparse hairs, bearing densely clustered leaves toward the
tips, which appear almost whorled in full sun. Buds light green and naked. Leaves paired, elliptic to obovate.
0.7-2.4" (1,8-6 cm) long, blunt to rounded at the tip, often with a short projecting nipple. Surface hairless or
sparsely hairy above and dark blue-green, with a fine network of whitish veinlets. The underside is paler with
sparse, soft hairs concentrated on the veins. Midvein slightly depressed above, the secondary veins faintly
or not at all; both protrude below. Margins entire, often downcurved, with a fringe of fine hairs. Petiole flat
to broadly channeled, hairy, upturned parallel to the stem, and extremely short (2-3% of blade length) Flow-
ers (late spring to early summer) 12-14 mm long, funnel-shaped, yellow, borne in pairs on short stalks from leaf
axils. The two flowers have joined
ovaries that grow together into
a single berry with 2 small linear
bracts underneath. Berry 5-8 mm
long, oval, the skin smooth and
bloom-coated, ripening to pur-
ple-blue in mid summer, the flesh
soft and juicy with a few semi-
soft seeds inside, the end with a
small double-dimple with protrud-
ing flower remnants.
HABITAT: Conifer or alder
swamps, especially with cedar,
mossy uplands, fens, and lake-
shores, usually with calcareous
soil. Found in shade but only fruits
well in sunny sites. Native.
FOOD USE: Ripe berries can be
eaten raw or cooked. The flavor
is good, but they are usually hard
to collect in quantity. Conserva-
tion 1.
COMMENTS: This little-known
berry is an unusual gem of the
northern swamps. Those from
Eurasian populations have been
bred for larger fruit and heavy
bearing, giving us what the
nursery trade calls haskaps or
honeyberries. AKA waterberry,
Lonicera villosa.
107
BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED 12 Blue honeysuckle 3 Lonicera caerulaea family Caprifoliaceae QUICK CHECK: Knee-high shrub of bogs with paired, entire leaves and "two ayad" blue berries. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Clump-forming or isolated shrub1-3.5' (30-100 cm) tall, the bark shredding in grayish papery strips to reveal red-brown beneath. Sapwood is light green and aromatic, as with other honeysuckles. Branches mostly erect, the angles narrow; twigs are purplish- red at the nodes with long, soft, sparse hairs, bearing densely clustered leaves toward the tips, which appear almost whorled in full sun. Buds light green and naked. Leaves paired, elliptic to obovate. 0.7-2.4" (1,8-6 cm) long, blunt to rounded at the tip, often with a short projecting nipple. Surface hairless or sparsely hairy above and dark blue-green, with a fine network of whitish veinlets. The underside is paler with sparse, soft hairs concentrated on the veins. Midvein slightly depressed above, the secondary veins faintly or not at all; both protrude below. Margins entire, often downcurved, with a fringe of fine hairs. Petiole flat to broadly channeled, hairy, upturned parallel to the stem, and extremely short (2-3% of blade length) Flow- ers (late spring to early summer) 12-14 mm long, funnel-shaped, yellow, borne in pairs on short stalks from leaf axils. The two flowers have joined ovaries that grow together into a single berry with 2 small linear bracts underneath. Berry 5-8 mm long, oval, the skin smooth and bloom-coated, ripening to pur- ple-blue in mid summer, the flesh soft and juicy with a few semi- soft seeds inside, the end with a small double-dimple with protrud- ing flower remnants. HABITAT: Conifer or alder swamps, especially with cedar, mossy uplands, fens, and lake- shores, usually with calcareous soil. Found in shade but only fruits well in sunny sites. Native. FOOD USE: Ripe berries can be eaten raw or cooked. The flavor is good, but they are usually hard to collect in quantity. Conserva- tion 1. COMMENTS: This little-known berry is an unusual gem of the northern swamps. Those from Eurasian populations have been bred for larger fruit and heavy bearing, giving us what the nursery trade calls haskaps or honeyberries. AKA waterberry, Lonicera villosa. 107 