BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED
14 Black aronia
2
NG-314
Aronia melanocarpa
Rosaceae (Rose family)
(UICK CHECK: Shrub with alternate, finely serrated leaves and lustor. of
with a dimpled end and a 5-part end calyx. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Medium-sized shrub forming loose clumps of limber stems 8
tall. Leaves alternate, ovate to obovate, slightly folded along the midvein, 1 (2.5 8cm) m)
long, the base acute to tapered and the tip abruptly pointed to ao uminate. There are small
elliptic to lanceolate stipules at the base. The surface is glassy and hairless above. but
may be soft-hairy below. Midvein flat or slightly depressed above, offset by light green
color, with tiny, dark purplish gland-hairs. Secondary veins are 4-5 per side, arching toward
the leaf tip, flat or faintly depressed above. Margins evenly serrated with small, gland-tipped. plant reeth
Petioles 5-8% of blade length, hairless, flattened to faintly channeled on top. Inflorescence , beanch flat
topped cluster of 8-20. Flowers (late spring) 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) across, with 5 triangular sepais broad
separate white petals, and numerous stamens. Berry spherical, 6-10 mm, with a distinct 5-point inder* X
crimp on the end along with a 5-lobed calyx. The flesh is juicy with many soft seeds, ripening to blue-b dok
CONFUSING PLANTS: In landscape plantings it is sometimes confused with various species of Cotoneaster,
but these do not have similarly clustered fruits.
HABITAT: Shrubby borders of swamps and bogs, lakeshores in full to partial sun, and occasional or dry
hilltops and cliffs. Most common in sandy soil.
Often cultivated as an ornamental, in which case
it will tolerate almost any sunny site regardless
of drainage. Native.
FOOD USE: The berries are astringent even when
fully ripe. While they can be used whole, they are
best diluted by milder flavors. However, little of
the fruit's astringency is imparted to raw. cold-
pressed juice. Boiling or steaming to get juice will
make it more astringent. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Russian agronomists identified
this North American shrub as a potential cΓop in
the late 1800s and began a breeding program. It
is now an important juice crop in much of eastern
Europe-the cultivars incorporating some genet-
ics of mountain ash to increase fruit size-but
aronia is mostly ignored as a food in its native
hemisphere. However,
it has become a popular
shrub for landscape plant-
ings and can often be col-
lected by urban for agers
and the cultivars planted
are better than the aver-
age wild fruit A. arbuti-
totra (red chokeberry) is
a close relative with red
truit (P 151). AKA black
Because
J:
hokeberry.
the
similar
names
peo-
ple often contuse cheke
Berry
with
LhokeCherry
169
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED 14 Black aronia 2 NG-314 Aronia melanocarpa Rosaceae (Rose family) (UICK CHECK: Shrub with alternate, finely serrated leaves and lustor. of with a dimpled end and a 5-part end calyx. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Medium-sized shrub forming loose clumps of limber stems 8 tall. Leaves alternate, ovate to obovate, slightly folded along the midvein, 1 (2.5 8cm) m) long, the base acute to tapered and the tip abruptly pointed to ao uminate. There are small elliptic to lanceolate stipules at the base. The surface is glassy and hairless above. but may be soft-hairy below. Midvein flat or slightly depressed above, offset by light green color, with tiny, dark purplish gland-hairs. Secondary veins are 4-5 per side, arching toward the leaf tip, flat or faintly depressed above. Margins evenly serrated with small, gland-tipped. plant reeth Petioles 5-8% of blade length, hairless, flattened to faintly channeled on top. Inflorescence , beanch flat topped cluster of 8-20. Flowers (late spring) 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) across, with 5 triangular sepais broad separate white petals, and numerous stamens. Berry spherical, 6-10 mm, with a distinct 5-point inder* X crimp on the end along with a 5-lobed calyx. The flesh is juicy with many soft seeds, ripening to blue-b dok CONFUSING PLANTS: In landscape plantings it is sometimes confused with various species of Cotoneaster, but these do not have similarly clustered fruits. HABITAT: Shrubby borders of swamps and bogs, lakeshores in full to partial sun, and occasional or dry hilltops and cliffs. Most common in sandy soil. Often cultivated as an ornamental, in which case it will tolerate almost any sunny site regardless of drainage. Native. FOOD USE: The berries are astringent even when fully ripe. While they can be used whole, they are best diluted by milder flavors. However, little of the fruit's astringency is imparted to raw. cold- pressed juice. Boiling or steaming to get juice will make it more astringent. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Russian agronomists identified this North American shrub as a potential cΓop in the late 1800s and began a breeding program. It is now an important juice crop in much of eastern Europe-the cultivars incorporating some genet- ics of mountain ash to increase fruit size-but aronia is mostly ignored as a food in its native hemisphere. However, it has become a popular shrub for landscape plant- ings and can often be col- lected by urban for agers and the cultivars planted are better than the aver- age wild fruit A. arbuti- totra (red chokeberry) is a close relative with red truit (P 151). AKA black Because J: hokeberry. the similar names peo- ple often contuse cheke Berry with LhokeCherry 169 