13 Beautyberry
Callicarpa americana
Lamiaciae (Mint family)
QUICK CHECK: Head-high shrub with paired leaves and tight, showy clusters of bright
purple berries encircling the stem at each node. ID difficulty 1.
Shrub to 10' (3 m) high, often forming loose colonies, sometimes with and
DESCRIPTION: trunks from the base. Stems woody but weak, usually leaning, the limbs long growth
lanky covered with tufts of fine white hair that eventually sloughs off. Leaves
multiple with few branches. Bark gray roughened by raised white lenticels. Summer paired,
is densely cm) long, ovate to lanceolate, tapered to a point at both ends; they are hairy above and above less hairy and
3-5" (8-13 often with fine wool, and slightly aromatic when crushed. Veins prominently depressed the
below, below; secondary veins curve toward the tip. Margins have rounded teeth except in axils, proximal the
projecting quarter. Petioles 10-15% of blade length. Inflorescence branching clusters of 25-60 from leaf
flowers crammed together. Flowers (early to mid summer) 3-5 mm wide, light pinkish to white, tubular, the
symmetrical tips with 4-5 blunt spreading lobes, the stamens and style protruding far beyond the corolla.
Berry spherical, 3-5 mm, ripening in late summer or autumn to shiny pinkish-purple, glossy on the outside,
the whitish flesh inside containing four small seeds. The fruit cluster is packed so tightly around the stem as
to give the impression of an aggregate (hence the name, French mulberry).
HABITAT: Disturbed woodlands, forest borders, and forests with thin canopies. Often prevalent in pine
plantations. More common on poor soils, moist or dry. It can persist in shady woods but rarely fruits well
there. Native.
FOOD USE: Ripe berries are boring but beautiful raw. Cooked into jam/jelly or fruit leather they are much
better. They often sit on the bushes for months after ripening. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is one of the
only woody plants in our region
belonging to the mint family,
and it is one of the most attrac-
tive and distinctive shrubs of
the South. The raw berries are
bland, but some people rave
about the jelly. AKA French
mulberry.
168
13 Beautyberry Callicarpa americana Lamiaciae (Mint family) QUICK CHECK: Head-high shrub with paired leaves and tight, showy clusters of bright purple berries encircling the stem at each node. ID difficulty 1. Shrub to 10' (3 m) high, often forming loose colonies, sometimes with and DESCRIPTION: trunks from the base. Stems woody but weak, usually leaning, the limbs long growth lanky covered with tufts of fine white hair that eventually sloughs off. Leaves multiple with few branches. Bark gray roughened by raised white lenticels. Summer paired, is densely cm) long, ovate to lanceolate, tapered to a point at both ends; they are hairy above and above less hairy and 3-5" (8-13 often with fine wool, and slightly aromatic when crushed. Veins prominently depressed the below, below; secondary veins curve toward the tip. Margins have rounded teeth except in axils, proximal the projecting quarter. Petioles 10-15% of blade length. Inflorescence branching clusters of 25-60 from leaf flowers crammed together. Flowers (early to mid summer) 3-5 mm wide, light pinkish to white, tubular, the symmetrical tips with 4-5 blunt spreading lobes, the stamens and style protruding far beyond the corolla. Berry spherical, 3-5 mm, ripening in late summer or autumn to shiny pinkish-purple, glossy on the outside, the whitish flesh inside containing four small seeds. The fruit cluster is packed so tightly around the stem as to give the impression of an aggregate (hence the name, French mulberry). HABITAT: Disturbed woodlands, forest borders, and forests with thin canopies. Often prevalent in pine plantations. More common on poor soils, moist or dry. It can persist in shady woods but rarely fruits well there. Native. FOOD USE: Ripe berries are boring but beautiful raw. Cooked into jam/jelly or fruit leather they are much better. They often sit on the bushes for months after ripening. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is one of the only woody plants in our region belonging to the mint family, and it is one of the most attrac- tive and distinctive shrubs of the South. The raw berries are bland, but some people rave about the jelly. AKA French mulberry. 168 