BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED
15 Carolina buckthorn
Rhamnus caroliniana
Rhamnaceae (Buckthorn family)
QUICK CHECK: Large shrub with alternate, faintly-toothed leaves and dark, round fruit
with 3 hard seeds. ID difficulty 2.
A large shrub or small tree 8-32' (2.5-10 m) tall, thornless, taller Twigs than
DESCRIPTION: forming loose thickets. Bark gray, smooth or faintly furrowed. side
wide. sometimes small amount of fine woolly hair but older branches lose this. Buds naked; cm)
have a while terminal buds are long and pointed. Leaves alternate, 2-5" (5-13
buds oblanceolate are tiny to long-elliptic, the tips abruptly pointed to blunt, the bases rounded to obtuse. The especially upper
surface long, is dark shiny, and essentially hairless; the lower surface is pale and may be woolly,
along the main green, veins. Midvein depressed. Secondary veins are conspicuous, depressed above, straight but or
arching but curving gently forward just before reaching the margin. Margins at a glance appear entire,
a closer look reveals very short, wide, blunt teeth. Petioles 7-10% of blade length, not channeled, with fine
wool. Inflorescence a small, few-flowered, short-stalked umbel. Flowers (late spring) 4-6 mm across with
5 sepals, 5 smaller whitish to light yellow petals, 5 stamens, and a 3-forked style. Berry spherical with a tiny
disk at the base, first turning scarlet, then black, containing 3 large, hard seeds. The flesh is mealy to slightly
juicy but not dark inside when ripe in fall.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Glossy buckthorn (p. 661) has 2 seeds and toothless leaves. Lance-leaf buckthorn
R. lanceolata has blunt, rounded, scale-covered buds and 2 seeds per fruit. These species are reputed to be
mildly poisonous.
HABITAT: Dry, open woods and forest edges, especially on limestone soils. Native.
FOOD USE: Berries can be eaten raw or cooked, but are not very good. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This berry is slightly sweet and bland. Edible, but nothing anybody gets excited over. In fact,
I am so unexcited that I had trouble deciding to include it in this book. I feel pretty certain that eaten in any
substantial quantity these would give you diarrhea. That said, I have eaten a palmful many times without
incident, and they weren't bad enough to prevent me from doing it again.
170
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED 15 Carolina buckthorn Rhamnus caroliniana Rhamnaceae (Buckthorn family) QUICK CHECK: Large shrub with alternate, faintly-toothed leaves and dark, round fruit with 3 hard seeds. ID difficulty 2. A large shrub or small tree 8-32' (2.5-10 m) tall, thornless, taller Twigs than DESCRIPTION: forming loose thickets. Bark gray, smooth or faintly furrowed. side wide. sometimes small amount of fine woolly hair but older branches lose this. Buds naked; cm) have a while terminal buds are long and pointed. Leaves alternate, 2-5" (5-13 buds oblanceolate are tiny to long-elliptic, the tips abruptly pointed to blunt, the bases rounded to obtuse. The especially upper surface long, is dark shiny, and essentially hairless; the lower surface is pale and may be woolly, along the main green, veins. Midvein depressed. Secondary veins are conspicuous, depressed above, straight but or arching but curving gently forward just before reaching the margin. Margins at a glance appear entire, a closer look reveals very short, wide, blunt teeth. Petioles 7-10% of blade length, not channeled, with fine wool. Inflorescence a small, few-flowered, short-stalked umbel. Flowers (late spring) 4-6 mm across with 5 sepals, 5 smaller whitish to light yellow petals, 5 stamens, and a 3-forked style. Berry spherical with a tiny disk at the base, first turning scarlet, then black, containing 3 large, hard seeds. The flesh is mealy to slightly juicy but not dark inside when ripe in fall. CONFUSING PLANTS: Glossy buckthorn (p. 661) has 2 seeds and toothless leaves. Lance-leaf buckthorn R. lanceolata has blunt, rounded, scale-covered buds and 2 seeds per fruit. These species are reputed to be mildly poisonous. HABITAT: Dry, open woods and forest edges, especially on limestone soils. Native. FOOD USE: Berries can be eaten raw or cooked, but are not very good. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This berry is slightly sweet and bland. Edible, but nothing anybody gets excited over. In fact, I am so unexcited that I had trouble deciding to include it in this book. I feel pretty certain that eaten in any substantial quantity these would give you diarrhea. That said, I have eaten a palmful many times without incident, and they weren't bad enough to prevent me from doing it again. 170 