BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED
16 Black huckleberry
3 []] NG-275
Gaylussacia baccata
Ericaceae (Heath family)
QUICK small, spherical CHECK: Knee to chest-high bush with elliptic, entire, gland-dotted leaves and
blue-black berries with crunchy seeds. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: ing underground Erect shrub 2-5' (60-150 cm) tall with a widely branching
at first but to form loose colonies. Twigs very thin, brownish and top, spread-
with eventually losing their pubescence. Older stems are dark minutely hairy
long, distinctly larger toward twig tips, elliptic or oblong to ovate, tapered at the base cm)
peeling papery bark. Buds very small and blunt. Leaves alternate, purple-gray, 0.8-2.5" (2-6 often
abruptly along the pointed or blunt at the tip. Surface with yellowish resinous dots, especially below, and and
midvein above. Secondary veins 3-5 per side, slightly depressed; the veinlets fine, soft hairs
Margins (18 entire with fine hairs. Petiole 2-5% of blade length. Inflorescence a small raceme minutely of depressed
bell mm) long, usually one-sided, on twigs of the previous year. Flowers (late spring) 4-6 mm long, 3-9, the to 0.7"
or urn-shaped, dull red, drooping, with 5 recurved lobes at the tip and a 5-lobed green calyx about corolla
its length. Berry spherical, 5-8 mm with a tiny calyx at the tip, ripening to blue-black, the surface with little 1/3
to no bloom, containing 10 hard, crunchy seeds. There are no mini-leaves (bracts) in the fruiting raceme.
HABITAT: Poor, acidic, dry or moist soils in full sun to light shade.
Common in sandstone hills under mixed oak and pine and also in
glacial outwash sand plains. Native.
FOOD USE: Ripe berries are delicious fresh despite the crunchy
seeds. They make excellent pie and fruit leather. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This
species is not the same
as what is called black
huckleberry in the
West. By flavor I prefer
it over any blueberry.
The deep, spreading
root system easily sur-
vives litter fires. There
are several other mem-
bers of this genus, all
with edible fruit.
Related edible:
17 Dangleberry
Gaylussacia frondosa
3
This is a shrub of moist, sandy, acidic soil
in places like swamp margins, low spots
in sandy woods, and boggy flatwoods. It
averages somewhat taller than black huck-
leberry, reaching 7' (2.1 m). The leaves are
larger, up to 4" (10 cm) long, whitish and
downy on the underside, and only the lower surface has containing resinous
The fruit clusters are much longer and drooping, berries
dots. leaves (bracts), most of which fall upon ripening. The This
tiny individual stems. The skin is coated with huckleberry bloom.
are species on long is as good as black huckleberry. AKA tall
BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED 16 Black huckleberry 3 []] NG-275 Gaylussacia baccata Ericaceae (Heath family) QUICK small, spherical CHECK: Knee to chest-high bush with elliptic, entire, gland-dotted leaves and blue-black berries with crunchy seeds. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: ing underground Erect shrub 2-5' (60-150 cm) tall with a widely branching at first but to form loose colonies. Twigs very thin, brownish and top, spread- with eventually losing their pubescence. Older stems are dark minutely hairy long, distinctly larger toward twig tips, elliptic or oblong to ovate, tapered at the base cm) peeling papery bark. Buds very small and blunt. Leaves alternate, purple-gray, 0.8-2.5" (2-6 often abruptly along the pointed or blunt at the tip. Surface with yellowish resinous dots, especially below, and and midvein above. Secondary veins 3-5 per side, slightly depressed; the veinlets fine, soft hairs Margins (18 entire with fine hairs. Petiole 2-5% of blade length. Inflorescence a small raceme minutely of depressed bell mm) long, usually one-sided, on twigs of the previous year. Flowers (late spring) 4-6 mm long, 3-9, the to 0.7" or urn-shaped, dull red, drooping, with 5 recurved lobes at the tip and a 5-lobed green calyx about corolla its length. Berry spherical, 5-8 mm with a tiny calyx at the tip, ripening to blue-black, the surface with little 1/3 to no bloom, containing 10 hard, crunchy seeds. There are no mini-leaves (bracts) in the fruiting raceme. HABITAT: Poor, acidic, dry or moist soils in full sun to light shade. Common in sandstone hills under mixed oak and pine and also in glacial outwash sand plains. Native. FOOD USE: Ripe berries are delicious fresh despite the crunchy seeds. They make excellent pie and fruit leather. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This species is not the same as what is called black huckleberry in the West. By flavor I prefer it over any blueberry. The deep, spreading root system easily sur- vives litter fires. There are several other mem- bers of this genus, all with edible fruit. Related edible: 17 Dangleberry Gaylussacia frondosa 3 This is a shrub of moist, sandy, acidic soil in places like swamp margins, low spots in sandy woods, and boggy flatwoods. It averages somewhat taller than black huck- leberry, reaching 7' (2.1 m). The leaves are larger, up to 4" (10 cm) long, whitish and downy on the underside, and only the lower surface has containing resinous The fruit clusters are much longer and drooping, berries dots. leaves (bracts), most of which fall upon ripening. The This tiny individual stems. The skin is coated with huckleberry bloom. are species on long is as good as black huckleberry. AKA tall 