family)
WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED
19 Highbush blueberry
3 LI NG-256
Vaccinium corymbosum
Ericaceae (Heath family)
QUICK CHECK: Tall shrub with alternate, entire leaves and blue berries with a Supart
calyx. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Large shrub typically 6-14' (1.8-4 m) tall. Stems 0.6-2" (1.5% 5 cm) thick
Twigs
and crooked. Twigs green and faintly angled at first, eventually having a peeling red
brown cuticle; the oldest trunks are gray. Leaves alternate, ovate to lanceolate, entire or
occasionally with a few tiny teeth, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, thin, pointed at both ends, mostly
hairless but downy on the main veins below, the margins sometimes slightly downcurved.
Petioles 2-5% of blade length. Inflorescence an umbel-like raceme (corymb) of 5-15
Flowers bell-like, 7-11 mm long, with 5 spreading, white to pinkish lobes, Fruit the familiar blueberry, rotund
with a 5-part calyx on the end, dark blue and usually glaucous, 6-12 mm.
HABITAT: Low, wet, acidic soils, especially on sandy or rocky soil, usually in light shade. Stream, bog, and
lake margins, swamps, low ground in sandy woods. Native.
FOOD USE: Fruit ripens in mid summer (early summer in the South). Pick berries by hand or with a rake:
because the bushes are tall a blickey can often be used. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is the ancestor of the cultivated blueberry and sometimes produces in great abundance.
Cultivated vari-
eties have.been
selected for
smaller bushes.
as the wild ones
can often grow
out of reach. The
highbush blue-
berry has been
PLANTS:
split by some
taxonomists into
separate spe-
cies, but here we
are sticking with
one.
NABITAT:
173
family) WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED 19 Highbush blueberry 3 LI NG-256 Vaccinium corymbosum Ericaceae (Heath family) QUICK CHECK: Tall shrub with alternate, entire leaves and blue berries with a Supart calyx. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Large shrub typically 6-14' (1.8-4 m) tall. Stems 0.6-2" (1.5% 5 cm) thick Twigs and crooked. Twigs green and faintly angled at first, eventually having a peeling red brown cuticle; the oldest trunks are gray. Leaves alternate, ovate to lanceolate, entire or occasionally with a few tiny teeth, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, thin, pointed at both ends, mostly hairless but downy on the main veins below, the margins sometimes slightly downcurved. Petioles 2-5% of blade length. Inflorescence an umbel-like raceme (corymb) of 5-15 Flowers bell-like, 7-11 mm long, with 5 spreading, white to pinkish lobes, Fruit the familiar blueberry, rotund with a 5-part calyx on the end, dark blue and usually glaucous, 6-12 mm. HABITAT: Low, wet, acidic soils, especially on sandy or rocky soil, usually in light shade. Stream, bog, and lake margins, swamps, low ground in sandy woods. Native. FOOD USE: Fruit ripens in mid summer (early summer in the South). Pick berries by hand or with a rake: because the bushes are tall a blickey can often be used. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is the ancestor of the cultivated blueberry and sometimes produces in great abundance. Cultivated vari- eties have.been selected for smaller bushes. as the wild ones can often grow out of reach. The highbush blue- berry has been PLANTS: split by some taxonomists into separate spe- cies, but here we are sticking with one. NABITAT: 173 