BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED
18
Farkleberry Vaccinium arboreum 2 4 Ericaceae (Heath family)
shrub with blunt-tipped leaves and very difficulty small, 2. dryish black berries
without a powdery Large shrub or occasionally a small tree, in the typically northern 6-16' part (2-5 of its m) range, tall
QUICK CHECK: Large coating, drooping on thin pedicels. ID
DESCRIPTION: It is deciduous stiff, strong,
variable thin with twisted, tardily usually trunks deciduous the in size, up older hairy. to 0.8-2.5" 2.5" ones or greenish evergreen (6 covered cm) (2-6 or or claw-like in cm) reddish diameter. with further long, shredding point. at south. obovate first, Surface becoming Stems reddish-brown to broadly above often gray. shiny elliptic, multiple, Leaves and and gray the hairless alternate, erect, base bark. except acute, Twigs thick the very and
tip leathery, blunt or extremely rounded duller
depressed along above; the secondary midvein; veins
with a downturned nipple veins. Midvein slightly and
flat below or slightly and often raised hairy, and especially net-like. Margins along the curled major downward, entire glands. but with Petioles minute, 3-5% widely-spaced of blade length. waves Inflo-
rescence a short raceme 1-3" (2.5-8 cm)
long with miniature leaves (bracts) and
up to 7 flowers, the pedicels long and arch-
ing. Flowers (May-July) 3-5 mm across,
bell-shaped, all parts snow-white, the tips
with 5 strongly re-curled lobes. Berry 3-7 mm
across, spherical, almost hard, mealy rather
than juicy, ripening to purple-black, shiny,
with tiny crunchy seeds and a small 5-lobed
calyx at the tip. Ripens from late summer
to fall on an arching to drooping pedicel
longer than the fruit's diameter.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Gallberries (Ilex
glabra and I. coriacea) have thicker, fully
evergreen leaves with sparsely-toothed
margins and bark that does not become
flaky with age. The fruit has no calyx at the
end and has a projecting bristle; it is on a
shorter, stiffer pedicel that does not droop.
HABITAT: Dry, open woods, forest edges,
bluff tops, swamp margins on poor soil.
Likes acidic soil in full sun. Native,
FOOD USE: Gather ripe
berries in autumn as a
nibble, Mix with bland
or mild fruits for a tart,
huckleberry-like flavor, or
throw a few in hot cereal.
Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Although
often dismissed as
worthless, I think farkle-
berries have a strong,
raves are somewhat about dry and should not be compared to blueberries. They
tart, pleasant taste.
"Farkleberry" the is farkleberry-apple pie I once made at a cabin in the My family
ber ause popular also a term used to mock politicians in Arkansas, Ozarks.
woody plants a warranted cartoonist thought one Governor's ability to identify apparently native
derision. AKA sparkleberry.
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED 18 Farkleberry Vaccinium arboreum 2 4 Ericaceae (Heath family) shrub with blunt-tipped leaves and very difficulty small, 2. dryish black berries without a powdery Large shrub or occasionally a small tree, in the typically northern 6-16' part (2-5 of its m) range, tall QUICK CHECK: Large coating, drooping on thin pedicels. ID DESCRIPTION: It is deciduous stiff, strong, variable thin with twisted, tardily usually trunks deciduous the in size, up older hairy. to 0.8-2.5" 2.5" ones or greenish evergreen (6 covered cm) (2-6 or or claw-like in cm) reddish diameter. with further long, shredding point. at south. obovate first, Surface becoming Stems reddish-brown to broadly above often gray. shiny elliptic, multiple, Leaves and and gray the hairless alternate, erect, base bark. except acute, Twigs thick the very and tip leathery, blunt or extremely rounded duller depressed along above; the secondary midvein; veins with a downturned nipple veins. Midvein slightly and flat below or slightly and often raised hairy, and especially net-like. Margins along the curled major downward, entire glands. but with Petioles minute, 3-5% widely-spaced of blade length. waves Inflo- rescence a short raceme 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long with miniature leaves (bracts) and up to 7 flowers, the pedicels long and arch- ing. Flowers (May-July) 3-5 mm across, bell-shaped, all parts snow-white, the tips with 5 strongly re-curled lobes. Berry 3-7 mm across, spherical, almost hard, mealy rather than juicy, ripening to purple-black, shiny, with tiny crunchy seeds and a small 5-lobed calyx at the tip. Ripens from late summer to fall on an arching to drooping pedicel longer than the fruit's diameter. CONFUSING PLANTS: Gallberries (Ilex glabra and I. coriacea) have thicker, fully evergreen leaves with sparsely-toothed margins and bark that does not become flaky with age. The fruit has no calyx at the end and has a projecting bristle; it is on a shorter, stiffer pedicel that does not droop. HABITAT: Dry, open woods, forest edges, bluff tops, swamp margins on poor soil. Likes acidic soil in full sun. Native, FOOD USE: Gather ripe berries in autumn as a nibble, Mix with bland or mild fruits for a tart, huckleberry-like flavor, or throw a few in hot cereal. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Although often dismissed as worthless, I think farkle- berries have a strong, raves are somewhat about dry and should not be compared to blueberries. They tart, pleasant taste. "Farkleberry" the is farkleberry-apple pie I once made at a cabin in the My family ber ause popular also a term used to mock politicians in Arkansas, Ozarks. woody plants a warranted cartoonist thought one Governor's ability to identify apparently native derision. AKA sparkleberry. 