BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED
20 Lowbush blueberry
3
NG-256
Ericaceae
(Heath
family)
genus Vaccinium (in part)
QUICK CHECK: Low shrubs with tiny, pointed, alternate leaves, thin green twigs, and
blue-black berries with a 5-part calvx. ID difficulty 1.
Small shrubs 8-40" (20-100 cm) tall, spreading spread by rhi-
COLLECTIVE DESCRIPTION: Stems upright but the branches are crooked and often and often
zomes to form Bark colonies. smooth and grayish on older growth. Twigs extremely fine with point.
wider than tall. occasionally reddish. Buds miniscule, egg-shaped a at both
Composite range
ridged or alternate, angled, green 0.3-1,5" or (8-38 mm) long, lanceolate, elliptic, or obovate, pointed finely
of all species.
Leaves Veins and veinlets are depressed. Margins entire or very
ends, sessile or nearly so. a crowded raceme of up to 15. Flowers (spring) bell or urn-shaped, mostly not projecting hanging,
toothed. Inflorescence the tip, whitish (often with pink highlights), 4-7 mm long, the stamens often
with past five the opening. short lobes Fruit at spherical with a calyx of 5 triangular lobes on the end, blue-black, 5-12 mm,
glaucous, ripening in mid to late summer.
Vaccinium myrtilloides.
SPECIES: There are many species of lowbush
blueberries; two representatives are shown here.
HABITAT: Poor acidic soils, especially sand or
gravel, in full to partial sun, wet or dry. Rocky
wooded hillsides, boreal forests, pine lands,
clearings, bog edges, young forests that cast light
shade-proliferating after logging and fire.
FOOD USE: Pick the ripe fruit by hand or with
a blueberry rake. Eat fresh or use to make pies
or other desserts. Store by freezing, canning, or
drying. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: These are among the most popu-
lar wild foods in North America, and deservedly
so. Millions of pounds are collected
annually, both commercially and for
personal use. Lowbush blueberries
are classic fire-adapted species:
although fire destroys the above-
ground stems, it also destroys the
competition and releases mineral
nutrients, resulting in bumper crops
usually 2 years after the blaze. In
the absence of fire blueberries lose
ground to taller woody plants. Native
people traditionally managed mil-
lions of acres of blueberries with
fire; picking has deteriorated greatly
where fires have been suppressed.
174
Vocc inflam angustifolium
Vali Inturn ungustifolition
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED 20 Lowbush blueberry 3 NG-256 Ericaceae (Heath family) genus Vaccinium (in part) QUICK CHECK: Low shrubs with tiny, pointed, alternate leaves, thin green twigs, and blue-black berries with a 5-part calvx. ID difficulty 1. Small shrubs 8-40" (20-100 cm) tall, spreading spread by rhi- COLLECTIVE DESCRIPTION: Stems upright but the branches are crooked and often and often zomes to form Bark colonies. smooth and grayish on older growth. Twigs extremely fine with point. wider than tall. occasionally reddish. Buds miniscule, egg-shaped a at both Composite range ridged or alternate, angled, green 0.3-1,5" or (8-38 mm) long, lanceolate, elliptic, or obovate, pointed finely of all species. Leaves Veins and veinlets are depressed. Margins entire or very ends, sessile or nearly so. a crowded raceme of up to 15. Flowers (spring) bell or urn-shaped, mostly not projecting hanging, toothed. Inflorescence the tip, whitish (often with pink highlights), 4-7 mm long, the stamens often with past five the opening. short lobes Fruit at spherical with a calyx of 5 triangular lobes on the end, blue-black, 5-12 mm, glaucous, ripening in mid to late summer. Vaccinium myrtilloides. SPECIES: There are many species of lowbush blueberries; two representatives are shown here. HABITAT: Poor acidic soils, especially sand or gravel, in full to partial sun, wet or dry. Rocky wooded hillsides, boreal forests, pine lands, clearings, bog edges, young forests that cast light shade-proliferating after logging and fire. FOOD USE: Pick the ripe fruit by hand or with a blueberry rake. Eat fresh or use to make pies or other desserts. Store by freezing, canning, or drying. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: These are among the most popu- lar wild foods in North America, and deservedly so. Millions of pounds are collected annually, both commercially and for personal use. Lowbush blueberries are classic fire-adapted species: although fire destroys the above- ground stems, it also destroys the competition and releases mineral nutrients, resulting in bumper crops usually 2 years after the blaze. In the absence of fire blueberries lose ground to taller woody plants. Native people traditionally managed mil- lions of acres of blueberries with fire; picking has deteriorated greatly where fires have been suppressed. 174 Vocc inflam angustifolium Vali Inturn ungustifolition 