WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED
Related edible
21
Mayberry
Vaccinium elliottii
3
This low blueberry species of sandy pine woods in the
Deep South blooms in February or March and ripens in
late May to early June. The leaves are very small-only
slightly longer than the berry-and the small berries
ripen to black, usually without bloom. The flavor is
superb,
22 Bilberry
3
NG-256
Vaccinium uliginosum Ericaceae (Heath family)
QUICK CHECK: Very low shrub with tiny oval leaves and blueberry-like fruit. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Tiny deciduous shrub 2-10" (5-25 cm) tall, branching profusely with
very thin twigs, often forming colonies or mats by long, prostrate stems creeping under
the duff. Bark light brownish-orange with a thin, peeling, gray outer layer. New twigs are
greenish and minutely hairy. Buds small but plump, blunt, reddish, conspicuous at branch
tips when the fruit is ripe. Leaves alternate, sessile, 0.2-0.8" (5-20 mm) long, broadly
oval to nearly round, blunt or rounded at both ends, the tip often with a dark nipple, the
surfaces hairless and the margins entire. Veins depressed above and protruding below, in a net-like pattern.
Flowers pink, bell-like or urn-shaped, hanging, 4-5 mm long, with 4-5 tiny blunt lobes at the opening, borne
singly or in pairs from leaf axils. Fruit hangs on a pedicel 30% of its length, spherical to slightly oval, 6-8 mm
ripening to light blue with a bloom (occasionally blackish and without bloom). There is a single protruding style
that persists within the 5-lobed end calyx, the lobes blunt and turned inward (not spreading as in blueberries).
Seeds are tiny and hard to notice.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Told from lowbush blueberries by its small size, broad, blunt leaves, fruit borne mostly
singly, the protruding style on the fruit, and the lack of a spreading calyx.
HABITAT: Rocky places with poor soil in full sun: tundra, exposed hilltops, coastal baids, occasionally bogs.
Native.
FOOD USE: Gather berries in late summer through early fall. Delicious like an intensely flavored blueberry,
but harder to collect in quantity. Conservation 1.
RELATED EDIBLE: Another bilberry, V. cespitosum,
is characteristic of poor sands or gravels in the boreal
region. The leaves are obovate with blunt teeth and
less depressed veins, and the flowers are white and
more constricted with a vase-like opening.
175
WITH BERRIES-NOT ORANGE TO RED Related edible 21 Mayberry Vaccinium elliottii 3 This low blueberry species of sandy pine woods in the Deep South blooms in February or March and ripens in late May to early June. The leaves are very small-only slightly longer than the berry-and the small berries ripen to black, usually without bloom. The flavor is superb, 22 Bilberry 3 NG-256 Vaccinium uliginosum Ericaceae (Heath family) QUICK CHECK: Very low shrub with tiny oval leaves and blueberry-like fruit. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Tiny deciduous shrub 2-10" (5-25 cm) tall, branching profusely with very thin twigs, often forming colonies or mats by long, prostrate stems creeping under the duff. Bark light brownish-orange with a thin, peeling, gray outer layer. New twigs are greenish and minutely hairy. Buds small but plump, blunt, reddish, conspicuous at branch tips when the fruit is ripe. Leaves alternate, sessile, 0.2-0.8" (5-20 mm) long, broadly oval to nearly round, blunt or rounded at both ends, the tip often with a dark nipple, the surfaces hairless and the margins entire. Veins depressed above and protruding below, in a net-like pattern. Flowers pink, bell-like or urn-shaped, hanging, 4-5 mm long, with 4-5 tiny blunt lobes at the opening, borne singly or in pairs from leaf axils. Fruit hangs on a pedicel 30% of its length, spherical to slightly oval, 6-8 mm ripening to light blue with a bloom (occasionally blackish and without bloom). There is a single protruding style that persists within the 5-lobed end calyx, the lobes blunt and turned inward (not spreading as in blueberries). Seeds are tiny and hard to notice. CONFUSING PLANTS: Told from lowbush blueberries by its small size, broad, blunt leaves, fruit borne mostly singly, the protruding style on the fruit, and the lack of a spreading calyx. HABITAT: Rocky places with poor soil in full sun: tundra, exposed hilltops, coastal baids, occasionally bogs. Native. FOOD USE: Gather berries in late summer through early fall. Delicious like an intensely flavored blueberry, but harder to collect in quantity. Conservation 1. RELATED EDIBLE: Another bilberry, V. cespitosum, is characteristic of poor sands or gravels in the boreal region. The leaves are obovate with blunt teeth and less depressed veins, and the flowers are white and more constricted with a vase-like opening. 175 