SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS
CONFUSING highly aromatic PLANTS: leaves. Shoots can resemble ailanthus or walnut, both
and the whitish fruit droops Poison in grape-like sumac (p. 659) clusters-plus has shiny leaflets it grows lacking in teeth. of whir but las the the rachis milk is never and winger, ayo
FOOD outer ries they berries A seasoning can will bark USE: from be make and steeped Pick stems can a eat weak be shoots the if to made you and interior make in want from inferior late a to lemonade-like of spring the steep the brew. dried shoot when hot), Pick fruits raw. then they clusters drink. (see Staghorn strain snap Taste fragrant and easily through is the steep best and berries a in for do cloth. cold swamps, this not to water Rains make yet because have eventually for sure half a the white they shoots an are hour wash pith very are or Peel out larger SO sour. the off Cremove flavor bitter if Ber- not
sumac,
next).
Conservation
1.
COMMENTS: Sumac-ade will disappoint if you collect flavorless berry clusters or steep the bitter stems with
boiling water. If you pay careful attention to detail, the drink can be excellent.
WARNING: Sumacs are related to cashews, mangoes, and poison ivy. Rare individuals are also highly
allergic to the edible red sumacs.
IMPORTANT SPECIES: The three common and widespread species in our region are listed. All are native.
1
Winged sumac
Rhus coppalina
2
III)
Winged (shining)
sumac is easily dis-
tinguished by the
wings along the ra-
chis between the
shiny, entire leaflets.
The fruit is hairless.
This drought-toler-
ant sumac likes dry,
sunny sites such as
sandy openings and
rocky ridges.
A
2 Staghorn sumac
Rhus typhina
2
Staghorn
sumac
has twigs
and fruit
densely
covered
with soft
hairs. The leaves are hairy
below and faintly so above.
The secondary veins are slightly
depressed, the margins serrated
with large. forward-pointing
teeth This species is found in
disturbed, well-drained soil in
forested regions. A (linages
continued on the next page.)
177
SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS CONFUSING highly aromatic PLANTS: leaves. Shoots can resemble ailanthus or walnut, both and the whitish fruit droops Poison in grape-like sumac (p. 659) clusters-plus has shiny leaflets it grows lacking in teeth. of whir but las the the rachis milk is never and winger, ayo FOOD outer ries they berries A seasoning can will bark USE: from be make and steeped Pick stems can a eat weak be shoots the if to made you and interior make in want from inferior late a to lemonade-like of spring the steep the brew. dried shoot when hot), Pick fruits raw. then they clusters drink. (see Staghorn strain snap Taste fragrant and easily through is the steep best and berries a in for do cloth. cold swamps, this not to water Rains make yet because have eventually for sure half a the white they shoots an are hour wash pith very are or Peel out larger SO sour. the off Cremove flavor bitter if Ber- not sumac, next). Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Sumac-ade will disappoint if you collect flavorless berry clusters or steep the bitter stems with boiling water. If you pay careful attention to detail, the drink can be excellent. WARNING: Sumacs are related to cashews, mangoes, and poison ivy. Rare individuals are also highly allergic to the edible red sumacs. IMPORTANT SPECIES: The three common and widespread species in our region are listed. All are native. 1 Winged sumac Rhus coppalina 2 III) Winged (shining) sumac is easily dis- tinguished by the wings along the ra- chis between the shiny, entire leaflets. The fruit is hairless. This drought-toler- ant sumac likes dry, sunny sites such as sandy openings and rocky ridges. A 2 Staghorn sumac Rhus typhina 2 Staghorn sumac has twigs and fruit densely covered with soft hairs. The leaves are hairy below and faintly so above. The secondary veins are slightly depressed, the margins serrated with large. forward-pointing teeth This species is found in disturbed, well-drained soil in forested regions. A (linages continued on the next page.) 177 