BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS,
GROUP 12 BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT,
NUTLETS, OR PODS
aromatic shrubs tend to have dry, non-fleshy fruits that notice are not in
this is their adaptation to some combination of poor soil (whether
Highly dispersed by animal feeding. Another ecological trend you may
wet group or dry) and heavy disturbance. The primary use of every plant in often this
is as a drink or flavoring. Because the leaves are the part most
group used, the key uses leaf features where possible. Large specimens of the red
sumacs and prickly ash may key as trees.
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 12
The key is not your final answer!
4.
Fragrant sumac
Leaf temately compound; fruit red.
or
Leaf pinnately compound.
Branches prickly: red fruit held close to the branches.
5. Prickly-ash
Branches not prickly: fruit inerect spikes or panicles.
Fruit red, spherical to oval.
or
Leaf rachises with a wing between leaflets.
1. Winged sumac
or
Leaf rachises not winged between leaflets.
New growth densely covered with soft erect hairs.
2. Staghorn sumac
New growth smooth and bloom-coated.
3. Smooth sumac
Fruit a tiny green to brown pod: leaves densely covered in whitish wool.
6. Leadplant
Leaf simple.
or
Leaf margins deeply pinnately lobed; leaf long and narrow.
7. Sweet fern
Leaf margins toothed; leaves deciduous,
Margins regularly serrated; 2 major depressed secondary veins arise at leaf base.
or
Inflorescence at the end of a naked stem from a leaf axil.
or
8. Large New Jersey tea
Inflorescence at the end of a normal leafy branch.
Margins with teeth in the distal half only; no major secondary veins from the base.
9. Small New Jersey tea
Fruit pointed, packed into a tight spike.
Fruit a tiny ball covered with grayish waxy gobs.
10. Sweet gale
Leaf margins not toothed; blades tough and evergreen.
11. Bayberry
Margin strongly scrolled downward; leaf very densely woolly underneath.
Margin slightly downcurved; leaf not woolly underneath.
12. Labrador tea
13. Leatherleaf
RED SUMACS
FH-252
genus
Rhus
(in
part)
Anacardiaceae (Cashew family)
QUICK numerous CHECK: small, red Thick-twlgged fruit. ID difficulty shrubs 2. with pinnately compound leaves and erect, compact clusters of
DESCRIPTION: 25 with m) tall, rarely Shrubs branching or small near trees, the ground, not clumped the crown but forming clones by rhizome. Sap milky. Stems
gray, Buds prominent raised transverse brown lenticels spreading widely with sparse branches. erect, to
rachis minal 5 the seed of dry palm-like petals, flowers bases or that tiny, panicle with purplish, male constitutes angled tufts squat, on a 2-8" thin short and near not blunt, to outer (5-20 female pedicels. rounded, channeled. the most pulp cradled branch on of when long, Flowers separate Secondary its tips, Leaflets by volume. widest the first pinnately (early horseshoe-shaped trees. ripe, sessile, veins at the to hairy Fruit compound, are mid base ovate or spherical widely summer) often and on to older lanceolate, roughly angled coated leaf 7-20" to tiny scar. slightly trunks, (18-51 with and and tapered Leaves 1-5" numerous. white pale Twigs oblong cm) (2.5-13 to greenish-yellow alternate, sticky long the thick and tip, Inflorescence with exudate, slightly and with long, concentrated 7-23 sparse dozens flattened, the with leaflets. with tips a Bark 5 to crowded sepals thick sharp hundreds in Petiole/ 3-5 smooth, dense, pith. mm, and and ter-
176
containing
a
single
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, GROUP 12 BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS aromatic shrubs tend to have dry, non-fleshy fruits that notice are not in this is their adaptation to some combination of poor soil (whether Highly dispersed by animal feeding. Another ecological trend you may wet group or dry) and heavy disturbance. The primary use of every plant in often this is as a drink or flavoring. Because the leaves are the part most group used, the key uses leaf features where possible. Large specimens of the red sumacs and prickly ash may key as trees. TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 12 The key is not your final answer! 4. Fragrant sumac Leaf temately compound; fruit red. or Leaf pinnately compound. Branches prickly: red fruit held close to the branches. 5. Prickly-ash Branches not prickly: fruit inerect spikes or panicles. Fruit red, spherical to oval. or Leaf rachises with a wing between leaflets. 1. Winged sumac or Leaf rachises not winged between leaflets. New growth densely covered with soft erect hairs. 2. Staghorn sumac New growth smooth and bloom-coated. 3. Smooth sumac Fruit a tiny green to brown pod: leaves densely covered in whitish wool. 6. Leadplant Leaf simple. or Leaf margins deeply pinnately lobed; leaf long and narrow. 7. Sweet fern Leaf margins toothed; leaves deciduous, Margins regularly serrated; 2 major depressed secondary veins arise at leaf base. or Inflorescence at the end of a naked stem from a leaf axil. or 8. Large New Jersey tea Inflorescence at the end of a normal leafy branch. Margins with teeth in the distal half only; no major secondary veins from the base. 9. Small New Jersey tea Fruit pointed, packed into a tight spike. Fruit a tiny ball covered with grayish waxy gobs. 10. Sweet gale Leaf margins not toothed; blades tough and evergreen. 11. Bayberry Margin strongly scrolled downward; leaf very densely woolly underneath. Margin slightly downcurved; leaf not woolly underneath. 12. Labrador tea 13. Leatherleaf RED SUMACS FH-252 genus Rhus (in part) Anacardiaceae (Cashew family) QUICK numerous CHECK: small, red Thick-twlgged fruit. ID difficulty shrubs 2. with pinnately compound leaves and erect, compact clusters of DESCRIPTION: 25 with m) tall, rarely Shrubs branching or small near trees, the ground, not clumped the crown but forming clones by rhizome. Sap milky. Stems gray, Buds prominent raised transverse brown lenticels spreading widely with sparse branches. erect, to rachis minal 5 the seed of dry palm-like petals, flowers bases or that tiny, panicle with purplish, male constitutes angled tufts squat, on a 2-8" thin short and near not blunt, to outer (5-20 female pedicels. rounded, channeled. the most pulp cradled branch on of when long, Flowers separate Secondary its tips, Leaflets by volume. widest the first pinnately (early horseshoe-shaped trees. ripe, sessile, veins at the to hairy Fruit compound, are mid base ovate or spherical widely summer) often and on to older lanceolate, roughly angled coated leaf 7-20" to tiny scar. slightly trunks, (18-51 with and and tapered Leaves 1-5" numerous. white pale Twigs oblong cm) (2.5-13 to greenish-yellow alternate, sticky long the thick and tip, Inflorescence with exudate, slightly and with long, concentrated 7-23 sparse dozens flattened, the with leaflets. with tips a Bark 5 to crowded sepals thick sharp hundreds in Petiole/ 3-5 smooth, dense, pith. mm, and and ter- 176 containing a single 