WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS
4 Fragrant sumac
Rhus aromatica
Anacardiaceae (Cashew family)
QUICK CHECK: Belly-high shrub with 3-part compound leaves and small
dry red fruit. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Widely-branching, sprawling to upright shrub 2-5' (60-150 tall, often
forming thickets in full sun. Twlgs much thinner than those of other sumacs, reddish -
brown with fine hairs at first but eventually losing them, the leaf scars round and distinctly
raised, hiding the tiny buds. Catkins are often present. Older stems have red-brown bark with scattered raised
lenticels. Leaves aromatic when crushed, alternate, compound with 3 leaflets, all of them sessile. Petioles about
60% of terminal leaflet length, hairy, not channeled. Leaflets 2-2.8" (5-7 cm) long, rather thick and tough.
ovate to roughly diamond-shaped, the tips blunt to pointed. The bases of side leaflets are acute but those of
the end leaflets are usually tapered, almost wing-like. Blades hairy on both sides, the veins nearly flat above
Margins have a few scattered large, broad teeth or small lobes, mostly above the middle (larger lobes are occa-
sional); teeth have nipple tips. Flowers (spring) tiny, dull yellow with 5 petals, borne in dense panicles. Fruit
red and hairy with a single seed, packed into tight clusters 1-2.5" long, ripening mid to late summer. There is
a very thin flesh that dries out soon after ripening.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Often mistaken for poison ivy (p. 658) when not in fruit-the two are related, their
leaf textures are similar, and they often grow near each other. Poison ivy has larger leaves; its terminal leaflet
is long-stalked and the petiole of the whole leaf is longer than the leaflets.
HABITAT: Dry, sandy soil or rocky outcrops in full sun to moderate shade. Native.
FOOD USE: Mature berries can be steeped to make a beverage as with other red sumacs, but the shoots are
too small to be peeled and eaten. The berries can be dried and then rubbed to loosen the outer coating; after the
seeds are sifted out, this powder can be used as a seasoning like the sumac powder in za'atar traditionally used
in Middle Eastern cook-
ing. (This can also be
done with the fruit of
other sumacs.) Conser-
vation 1.
COMMENTS: Not as
weil-known as the larger
sumacs, this species is
separated here because
of its distinct form. Fra-
grant sumac's berries
have a unique peppery
hint. This species is
frequently planted as
a landscape shrub and
can likely be found in the
parking lot of your local
Walmart or McDonald's.
WARNING: Rare with
viduals are Margie (othe
edible Sumach which are
elated isllews 20,
sullivy and mangoes
179
WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS 4 Fragrant sumac Rhus aromatica Anacardiaceae (Cashew family) QUICK CHECK: Belly-high shrub with 3-part compound leaves and small dry red fruit. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Widely-branching, sprawling to upright shrub 2-5' (60-150 tall, often forming thickets in full sun. Twlgs much thinner than those of other sumacs, reddish - brown with fine hairs at first but eventually losing them, the leaf scars round and distinctly raised, hiding the tiny buds. Catkins are often present. Older stems have red-brown bark with scattered raised lenticels. Leaves aromatic when crushed, alternate, compound with 3 leaflets, all of them sessile. Petioles about 60% of terminal leaflet length, hairy, not channeled. Leaflets 2-2.8" (5-7 cm) long, rather thick and tough. ovate to roughly diamond-shaped, the tips blunt to pointed. The bases of side leaflets are acute but those of the end leaflets are usually tapered, almost wing-like. Blades hairy on both sides, the veins nearly flat above Margins have a few scattered large, broad teeth or small lobes, mostly above the middle (larger lobes are occa- sional); teeth have nipple tips. Flowers (spring) tiny, dull yellow with 5 petals, borne in dense panicles. Fruit red and hairy with a single seed, packed into tight clusters 1-2.5" long, ripening mid to late summer. There is a very thin flesh that dries out soon after ripening. CONFUSING PLANTS: Often mistaken for poison ivy (p. 658) when not in fruit-the two are related, their leaf textures are similar, and they often grow near each other. Poison ivy has larger leaves; its terminal leaflet is long-stalked and the petiole of the whole leaf is longer than the leaflets. HABITAT: Dry, sandy soil or rocky outcrops in full sun to moderate shade. Native. FOOD USE: Mature berries can be steeped to make a beverage as with other red sumacs, but the shoots are too small to be peeled and eaten. The berries can be dried and then rubbed to loosen the outer coating; after the seeds are sifted out, this powder can be used as a seasoning like the sumac powder in za'atar traditionally used in Middle Eastern cook- ing. (This can also be done with the fruit of other sumacs.) Conser- vation 1. COMMENTS: Not as weil-known as the larger sumacs, this species is separated here because of its distinct form. Fra- grant sumac's berries have a unique peppery hint. This species is frequently planted as a landscape shrub and can likely be found in the parking lot of your local Walmart or McDonald's. WARNING: Rare with viduals are Margie (othe edible Sumach which are elated isllews 20, sullivy and mangoes 179 