BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS
6 Leadplant
Amorpha canescens
Fabaceae (Bean family)
QUICK CHECK: Small shrub with pinnately compound leaves composed of tiny leaflate
large clusters of purple flowers. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Semi-woody shrub (upper branches die back in winter, but thicker branches
and main stems usually persist) spreading by root suckers, forming clumps but not thickets.
Stems erect or leaning, to 40" (1 m) tall, branches few. Bark gray-brown on older stems,
hairless, with lenticel bumps of the same color. New growth is green, straight, unbranched,
roundish with fine ridges, densely covered with short, fine, curly gray hair. Leaves alternate,
2-4" (5-10 cm) long, pinnately compound with 13-47 crowded, overlapping leaflets beginning at or near the
base of the rachis. Rachis nearly straight, thin, woolly, channeled. Leaflets nearly sessile, often held out of
plane, 0.4-0.8" (1-1.5 cm) long, ovate to elliptic (terminal leaflet broadly obovate), the bases broad in rounded
and the tips blunt to angled with a projecting bristle. The blades are entire and gray-green from a dense coat-
ing of minute, soft, silvery wool on both sides (but denser below). Midvein depressed above and protruding
below; secondary veins are broadly angled but nearly invisible. Inflorescence a cluster of dense racemes at
the branch tip, 3-7" (8-18 cm) long, holding numerous flowers on very short pedicels. Flowers (early to mid
summer) have a densely hairy, glandular calyx tube 3-4 mm long with 5 sharp lobes; the corolla is a single,
curved, purple petal sheathing bright yellow-orange protruding stamens. Fruit a small, hard, up-curved, woolly
pod usually holding one seed, ripening in late summer to fall.
HABITAT: Dry prairies in well-drained, sunny areas, especially steep slopes or sandy soil. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather the leaves any time and use fresh or dried for tea; the flavor is best in early summer. The
tea is best boiled to extract the most flavor. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This attractive shrub is an indicator of native prairie ecosystems and is an important food for
mule deer and other hoofed mammals. It is closely related to the prairie clovers (p. 647). When cut to the
ground it resprouts vigorously
and appears herbaceous; it is
occasionally used as a wonder
ful-smelling hay crop. Leadplant
is 50 named for the grayish color
of the leaves. not for an associa-
tion with lead in the soil. This
popular tea is still available to
purchase on some of the Great
Plains Indian reservations. It is
one of my favorites.
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS 6 Leadplant Amorpha canescens Fabaceae (Bean family) QUICK CHECK: Small shrub with pinnately compound leaves composed of tiny leaflate large clusters of purple flowers. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Semi-woody shrub (upper branches die back in winter, but thicker branches and main stems usually persist) spreading by root suckers, forming clumps but not thickets. Stems erect or leaning, to 40" (1 m) tall, branches few. Bark gray-brown on older stems, hairless, with lenticel bumps of the same color. New growth is green, straight, unbranched, roundish with fine ridges, densely covered with short, fine, curly gray hair. Leaves alternate, 2-4" (5-10 cm) long, pinnately compound with 13-47 crowded, overlapping leaflets beginning at or near the base of the rachis. Rachis nearly straight, thin, woolly, channeled. Leaflets nearly sessile, often held out of plane, 0.4-0.8" (1-1.5 cm) long, ovate to elliptic (terminal leaflet broadly obovate), the bases broad in rounded and the tips blunt to angled with a projecting bristle. The blades are entire and gray-green from a dense coat- ing of minute, soft, silvery wool on both sides (but denser below). Midvein depressed above and protruding below; secondary veins are broadly angled but nearly invisible. Inflorescence a cluster of dense racemes at the branch tip, 3-7" (8-18 cm) long, holding numerous flowers on very short pedicels. Flowers (early to mid summer) have a densely hairy, glandular calyx tube 3-4 mm long with 5 sharp lobes; the corolla is a single, curved, purple petal sheathing bright yellow-orange protruding stamens. Fruit a small, hard, up-curved, woolly pod usually holding one seed, ripening in late summer to fall. HABITAT: Dry prairies in well-drained, sunny areas, especially steep slopes or sandy soil. Native. FOOD USE: Gather the leaves any time and use fresh or dried for tea; the flavor is best in early summer. The tea is best boiled to extract the most flavor. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This attractive shrub is an indicator of native prairie ecosystems and is an important food for mule deer and other hoofed mammals. It is closely related to the prairie clovers (p. 647). When cut to the ground it resprouts vigorously and appears herbaceous; it is occasionally used as a wonder ful-smelling hay crop. Leadplant is 50 named for the grayish color of the leaves. not for an associa- tion with lead in the soil. This popular tea is still available to purchase on some of the Great Plains Indian reservations. It is one of my favorites. 