BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS,
5
Prickly-ash
family
Rutaceae
Zanthoxylum americanum
Thicket-forming large shrub with light gray bark, difficulty stout spines, 1. pinnately
compound QUICK CHEC leaves, K: and short-stemmed clusters of red fruit. ID
shrub, not clumped but often spreading by rhizomes to finely form thickets. bumpy,
DESCRIPTION: 6-20' Large (2-6m) tall and up to 3" (8 cm) in diameter, the bark thin, about 1 cm long
gray Stems blotched erect, with lighter gray. Branches twigs have paired, dark purple-brown wide-bottomed and spines hairless or nearly so. Rachis Leaves dark alternate, purple-
pinnately compound, 3-8" occasional small spines. Leaflets 1.5-3" (4-8 cm) long, the terminal one
at the nodes. New growth is (8-20 green; cm) long, are with mostly 7-13 leaflets, highly aromatic. ovate to elliptic, the bottom
brown and grooved rounded, with the tip blunt-pointed and notched. Side leaflets are sessile but depressed,
broadly stalk angled about to of its length. The surfaces are hairy, more so below. Midvein strongly to the
has a veins irregularly 25% depressed, and veinlets slightly depressed, giving a rough texture female upper on
secondary surface. Margins hairy, not toothed but notched. Flowers (spring) tiny and greenish, the male and
separate plants, in short-stalked, compact axillary clusters. Fruit bumpy, red, oily, roundish, highly aromatic,
4-6 mm, borne on red pedicels, splitting open at maturity in late summer to release a single shiny, black seed.
HABITAT: Dry slopes, savannahs, forest edges, and upper parts of floodplains, especially on soil that is sandy
but moderately rich. Prefers full sun and is very effective at invading abandoned fields. Native.
FOOD USE: The dried fruit
can be used as a seasoning,
especially after roasting. The
leaves can be used as well.
Both parts have a potent cit-
rusy flavor as well as a numb-
ing quality. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This spice is
easy to overuse: I've had a few
dishes where it was distinctly
overemployed. Sichuan pep-
per is a prickly-ash, and the
fruit of many species from this
genus are traditionally used
as a seasoning. Because of its
dependence on fire, prickly-
ash has a spotty distribution
in the eastern part of its range.
There are other members of
this genus in the US, but I
have not had the occasion to
Try them
180
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, 5 Prickly-ash family Rutaceae Zanthoxylum americanum Thicket-forming large shrub with light gray bark, difficulty stout spines, 1. pinnately compound QUICK CHEC leaves, K: and short-stemmed clusters of red fruit. ID shrub, not clumped but often spreading by rhizomes to finely form thickets. bumpy, DESCRIPTION: 6-20' Large (2-6m) tall and up to 3" (8 cm) in diameter, the bark thin, about 1 cm long gray Stems blotched erect, with lighter gray. Branches twigs have paired, dark purple-brown wide-bottomed and spines hairless or nearly so. Rachis Leaves dark alternate, purple- pinnately compound, 3-8" occasional small spines. Leaflets 1.5-3" (4-8 cm) long, the terminal one at the nodes. New growth is (8-20 green; cm) long, are with mostly 7-13 leaflets, highly aromatic. ovate to elliptic, the bottom brown and grooved rounded, with the tip blunt-pointed and notched. Side leaflets are sessile but depressed, broadly stalk angled about to of its length. The surfaces are hairy, more so below. Midvein strongly to the has a veins irregularly 25% depressed, and veinlets slightly depressed, giving a rough texture female upper on secondary surface. Margins hairy, not toothed but notched. Flowers (spring) tiny and greenish, the male and separate plants, in short-stalked, compact axillary clusters. Fruit bumpy, red, oily, roundish, highly aromatic, 4-6 mm, borne on red pedicels, splitting open at maturity in late summer to release a single shiny, black seed. HABITAT: Dry slopes, savannahs, forest edges, and upper parts of floodplains, especially on soil that is sandy but moderately rich. Prefers full sun and is very effective at invading abandoned fields. Native. FOOD USE: The dried fruit can be used as a seasoning, especially after roasting. The leaves can be used as well. Both parts have a potent cit- rusy flavor as well as a numb- ing quality. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This spice is easy to overuse: I've had a few dishes where it was distinctly overemployed. Sichuan pep- per is a prickly-ash, and the fruit of many species from this genus are traditionally used as a seasoning. Because of its dependence on fire, prickly- ash has a spotty distribution in the eastern part of its range. There are other members of this genus in the US, but I have not had the occasion to Try them 180 