7
Sweet-fern
Comptonia peregrina
family Myricaceae
QUICK CHECK: Knee-high shrub with linear, blunt-lobed, ruffled, aromatic leaves.
ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Highly aromatic shrub forming colonies by rhizome. Stems erect to lean- soft
to 40" (1m) tall, branching sparsely, the new growth reddish to brown with long,
hairs, ing, the older bark brown and becoming hairless. Buds are blunt and almost rounded.
Leaves alternate, sessile or with short petioles, with small linear stipules that are odd
shaped, cupped, and much larger on vigorous new shoots. Blades 1.5-5" (4-13 cm) long, linear,
tapered to a blunt tip, with many short, blunt lobes cut fully or almost to the midvein, the lobes mostly alternate,
with little space between them, and cupped downward. Surfaces usually hairy on both sides (especially along
the midvein) and rippled or wavy along the depressed secondary veins. Flowers (spring) in catkins, the male
drooping and green; the female small, erect, and red from protruding stigmas. Fruit a green bur-like structure
0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm) across with 5-15 embedded shiny nutlets, egg-shaped with a point, 5-6 mm long.
HABITAT: Dry, poor, sandy or gravelly
soils in full sun. Native.
FOOD USE: Leaves are used for tea or
occasionally a seasoning. The nutlets are
sometimes reported as edible, but they
are almost always empty, and the kernels
are so small that there is really no practical
way to use them as food. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This shrub has nitrogen-
fixing bacteria on its roots, which helps
it thrive in extremely poor soil. The seeds
can remain dormant in the soil for 70 years,
waiting for fire or another disturbance to
stimulate germination. A hot summer day
when the sun hits sweet-fern under red
pines generates a scent that embeds itself
forever in your memory.
7 Sweet-fern Comptonia peregrina family Myricaceae QUICK CHECK: Knee-high shrub with linear, blunt-lobed, ruffled, aromatic leaves. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Highly aromatic shrub forming colonies by rhizome. Stems erect to lean- soft to 40" (1m) tall, branching sparsely, the new growth reddish to brown with long, hairs, ing, the older bark brown and becoming hairless. Buds are blunt and almost rounded. Leaves alternate, sessile or with short petioles, with small linear stipules that are odd shaped, cupped, and much larger on vigorous new shoots. Blades 1.5-5" (4-13 cm) long, linear, tapered to a blunt tip, with many short, blunt lobes cut fully or almost to the midvein, the lobes mostly alternate, with little space between them, and cupped downward. Surfaces usually hairy on both sides (especially along the midvein) and rippled or wavy along the depressed secondary veins. Flowers (spring) in catkins, the male drooping and green; the female small, erect, and red from protruding stigmas. Fruit a green bur-like structure 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm) across with 5-15 embedded shiny nutlets, egg-shaped with a point, 5-6 mm long. HABITAT: Dry, poor, sandy or gravelly soils in full sun. Native. FOOD USE: Leaves are used for tea or occasionally a seasoning. The nutlets are sometimes reported as edible, but they are almost always empty, and the kernels are so small that there is really no practical way to use them as food. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This shrub has nitrogen- fixing bacteria on its roots, which helps it thrive in extremely poor soil. The seeds can remain dormant in the soil for 70 years, waiting for fire or another disturbance to stimulate germination. A hot summer day when the sun hits sweet-fern under red pines generates a scent that embeds itself forever in your memory. 