mm
1cm
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS
NEW JERSEY TEA
NG-280
genus
Ceanothus
(in
part)
Rhamnaceae
(Buckthorn
QUICK rom the CHECK: leaf base. Low ID shrubs difficulty with 2. alternate toothed leaves on very short family)
the DESCRIPTION: new growth Knee to waist-high shrubs from a large root mass, spreading
ing hairless. The green bushes and covered with fine hairs; older stems turn red-brown, only by seed Stems slumped
straight, erect branchlets are semi-woody; the lower portion persists through the then winter. gray, but eventually becom-
sparsely hairy above die back and fall off. Leaves alternate, 1.2-3.5" (3-9 cm) most of the thin
depressed above and hairier below, especially on the main veins. Midvein and long, ovate to lanceolate
Margins serrated and protruding below; there are 3 major veins from the base. arching major toward yeins are strongly
channeled. with small, blunt, claw or gland-tipped teeth. Petioles 5-10% of blade length, fir the leaf hp
of Inflorescence a dense elongated or ball-like cluster of dozens to hundreds of flowers. e-hair, not
many stalkless mini-umbels packed near each other along a central rachis, sometimes branched. the consisting
long, straight, extremely thin, and white. Flowers (early to mid summer) 3 mm across, with 5 white triangular pedicels
sepals curved in toward the center and 5 petals shaped like a folded or cupped hood at the end of 0 thin, curved.
stalk-like base. Fruit is a dry, brown, rounded, 3-lobed capsule about 5 mm across, attached to a flat. sawcer
like base. The fruits or their bases often persist for many months, aiding identification.
FOOD USE: Gather leaves and dry them out of direct sunlight; young leaves of early summer are pest. Braw
tea by boiling leaves until the water turns golden or reddish (depending on your preference). Use a arge
volume of leaves (enough to loosely fill the boiling vessel). Fermenting them like tea leaves will increase the
potency of the flavor. The species can be used almost interchangeably-the flavors are not exactly the same
but close. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: The two species of New Jersey tea are among the better and more popular wild teas. They
were widely used during the Revolutionary War when Oriental tea supplies were cut off.
8 Large New Jersey tea Ceanothus americanus
This species
is larger in
all respects.
The leaves
are ovate with
rounded bas-
es, and they
are usually
densely hairy underneath. The in-
florescence is at the end of a long
naked, straight stalk arising from a leaf axil, and it blooms about 3 weeks
later than the smaller species. Large NJ tea is more characteristic A of rich,
dry soils in prairies, rock outcroppings, and oak savannahs.
9 Small New Jersey tea
Ceanothus herbaceus
This plant IS shorter
with smaller, narrow-
er leaves, typically lan
ceolate or elliptic with
tapered or narrowly an:
gled bases. The blades
are less hairy. The inflo
rescence is borne at the endot anormal leafy
branchlet. Small NI tea IS charde teristic at
poor. dry soils, such as are found A impine and
oak barrens and sand prairies
183
mm 1cm BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS NEW JERSEY TEA NG-280 genus Ceanothus (in part) Rhamnaceae (Buckthorn QUICK rom the CHECK: leaf base. Low ID shrubs difficulty with 2. alternate toothed leaves on very short family) the DESCRIPTION: new growth Knee to waist-high shrubs from a large root mass, spreading ing hairless. The green bushes and covered with fine hairs; older stems turn red-brown, only by seed Stems slumped straight, erect branchlets are semi-woody; the lower portion persists through the then winter. gray, but eventually becom- sparsely hairy above die back and fall off. Leaves alternate, 1.2-3.5" (3-9 cm) most of the thin depressed above and hairier below, especially on the main veins. Midvein and long, ovate to lanceolate Margins serrated and protruding below; there are 3 major veins from the base. arching major toward yeins are strongly channeled. with small, blunt, claw or gland-tipped teeth. Petioles 5-10% of blade length, fir the leaf hp of Inflorescence a dense elongated or ball-like cluster of dozens to hundreds of flowers. e-hair, not many stalkless mini-umbels packed near each other along a central rachis, sometimes branched. the consisting long, straight, extremely thin, and white. Flowers (early to mid summer) 3 mm across, with 5 white triangular pedicels sepals curved in toward the center and 5 petals shaped like a folded or cupped hood at the end of 0 thin, curved. stalk-like base. Fruit is a dry, brown, rounded, 3-lobed capsule about 5 mm across, attached to a flat. sawcer like base. The fruits or their bases often persist for many months, aiding identification. FOOD USE: Gather leaves and dry them out of direct sunlight; young leaves of early summer are pest. Braw tea by boiling leaves until the water turns golden or reddish (depending on your preference). Use a arge volume of leaves (enough to loosely fill the boiling vessel). Fermenting them like tea leaves will increase the potency of the flavor. The species can be used almost interchangeably-the flavors are not exactly the same but close. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: The two species of New Jersey tea are among the better and more popular wild teas. They were widely used during the Revolutionary War when Oriental tea supplies were cut off. 8 Large New Jersey tea Ceanothus americanus This species is larger in all respects. The leaves are ovate with rounded bas- es, and they are usually densely hairy underneath. The in- florescence is at the end of a long naked, straight stalk arising from a leaf axil, and it blooms about 3 weeks later than the smaller species. Large NJ tea is more characteristic A of rich, dry soils in prairies, rock outcroppings, and oak savannahs. 9 Small New Jersey tea Ceanothus herbaceus This plant IS shorter with smaller, narrow- er leaves, typically lan ceolate or elliptic with tapered or narrowly an: gled bases. The blades are less hairy. The inflo rescence is borne at the endot anormal leafy branchlet. Small NI tea IS charde teristic at poor. dry soils, such as are found A impine and oak barrens and sand prairies 183 