0
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS
11 Bayberry
Myrica pensylvanica
family Myricaceae
UICK CHECK: Waist-high aromatic bush with nearly entire oblanceolate leaves
owded at the twig tips; small, round, waxy, gray berries clustered on naked stams
below the leaves. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Bushy aromatic shrub to 6' (2 m) tall with stiff ascending branches.
Twigs usually hairy and resinous with small, plump, reddish-brown to whitish buds;
older bark has longitudinal cracks. Leaves alternate, crowded and overlapping at the
twig tips, often twisted sideways, tough but not evergreen, although falling late. Blades
obovate or oblanceolate, 1.5-4" (4-10 cm) long, tapered to a narrow, wedge-shaped base, blunt-pointed at
the tip. Surface dark, dull green and hairless or slightly hairy above; the underside is downy with small resin
globs. Margins entire or with a few small teeth in the distal half. Flowers (May-July) tiny and wind-pollina
male and female on separate bushes, from naked stem sections below the leaves. Male catkins are 0.3-0.6"
(8-15 mm) long. Female catkins are in dense clumps close to the stem. Fruit aromatic, spherical, 3-5 mm, in
small, stiff clusters with very short pedicels, coated with lumps of light grayish wax, containing a single large
seed, ripening in late summer and often persisting through winter.
HABITAT: Sandy coastal areas slightly above water level. Native.
FOOD USE: Leaves can be used as a seasoning in soups, like bay leaf. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: The berries are sometimes gathered and boiled to extract the fragrant wax coating-the
source of bay wax candles.
RELATED EDIBLE: Wax myrtle Myrica cerifera is a closely related shrub or small tree with a more southerly
distribution. It can be used similarly as a flavoring (and for wax-making) but the flavor is weaker.
Wax myrtle
185
0 BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS 11 Bayberry Myrica pensylvanica family Myricaceae UICK CHECK: Waist-high aromatic bush with nearly entire oblanceolate leaves owded at the twig tips; small, round, waxy, gray berries clustered on naked stams below the leaves. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Bushy aromatic shrub to 6' (2 m) tall with stiff ascending branches. Twigs usually hairy and resinous with small, plump, reddish-brown to whitish buds; older bark has longitudinal cracks. Leaves alternate, crowded and overlapping at the twig tips, often twisted sideways, tough but not evergreen, although falling late. Blades obovate or oblanceolate, 1.5-4" (4-10 cm) long, tapered to a narrow, wedge-shaped base, blunt-pointed at the tip. Surface dark, dull green and hairless or slightly hairy above; the underside is downy with small resin globs. Margins entire or with a few small teeth in the distal half. Flowers (May-July) tiny and wind-pollina male and female on separate bushes, from naked stem sections below the leaves. Male catkins are 0.3-0.6" (8-15 mm) long. Female catkins are in dense clumps close to the stem. Fruit aromatic, spherical, 3-5 mm, in small, stiff clusters with very short pedicels, coated with lumps of light grayish wax, containing a single large seed, ripening in late summer and often persisting through winter. HABITAT: Sandy coastal areas slightly above water level. Native. FOOD USE: Leaves can be used as a seasoning in soups, like bay leaf. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: The berries are sometimes gathered and boiled to extract the fragrant wax coating-the source of bay wax candles. RELATED EDIBLE: Wax myrtle Myrica cerifera is a closely related shrub or small tree with a more southerly distribution. It can be used similarly as a flavoring (and for wax-making) but the flavor is weaker. Wax myrtle 185 