BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS
10 Sweet gale
Myrica CHECK: waist high shoreline shrub with narrow, dark blue-green, ascending
gale family Myricaceae
average branch with DESCRIPTION: Stems QUICK leaves whitish erect crowded tips, ascending, lenticels. to leaning. al Shrub branch the Twigs often sessile 2-5 tips tips hairy (60-150 forming (to or ID 3.5"/9 on with difficulty extremely cm) clumps, plump, cm). tall, Lower 2. layering the squat short branches leaves buds. petioles. and with on suckering Leaves ascending. older blunt They alternate, growth tips for are and Bark short much may a crowded red-brown distances. tapered larger be as on at
small base, as nearly 3 mm, new flat, but leaves but the
new shoots size and are is 1.5-2,2" near slightly (4-6 and cm). minutely Blades downcurved, oblanceolate, especially golden speckles near the below. base. Midvein Surface light hairless; green, protruding veins are
the have margins golden speckles above, while all leaves have larger above, significantly below. Secondary toothed
slightly but faint, at broad angles. Margins at the
numerous the terminal 40%; teeth have a light dot the male
only Inflorescence in (spring) ascending catkins: dark;
tip. broad purple scales, their tips acuminate and
with female with a tuft of long purple stigmas. Fruit tiny,
yellow-green, the sessile, egg-shaped, with a tooth-like tip
and dark, thread-like flower remnants, highly aromatic,
in a cone-like spike 1 cm long, ripening in late summer,
exuding a yellow-orange wax (visible if pressed on paper).
HABITAT: Shorelines in full sun, especially with infertile
rock, gravel, or sand; often on thin peat or muck over such
material, but rarely in floating bogs. Native.
FOOD USE: Leaves can be used to brew a tea or as a sea-
soning in broths, like bay leaf. Flower buds and fruits can
be used similarly and are more aromatic. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Often extremely abundant in Northwoods
lake country, perfuming the shoreline breeze on hot
summer days.
184
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS 10 Sweet gale Myrica CHECK: waist high shoreline shrub with narrow, dark blue-green, ascending gale family Myricaceae average branch with DESCRIPTION: Stems QUICK leaves whitish erect crowded tips, ascending, lenticels. to leaning. al Shrub branch the Twigs often sessile 2-5 tips tips hairy (60-150 forming (to or ID 3.5"/9 on with difficulty extremely cm) clumps, plump, cm). tall, Lower 2. layering the squat short branches leaves buds. petioles. and with on suckering Leaves ascending. older blunt They alternate, growth tips for are and Bark short much may a crowded red-brown distances. tapered larger be as on at small base, as nearly 3 mm, new flat, but leaves but the new shoots size and are is 1.5-2,2" near slightly (4-6 and cm). minutely Blades downcurved, oblanceolate, especially golden speckles near the below. base. Midvein Surface light hairless; green, protruding veins are the have margins golden speckles above, while all leaves have larger above, significantly below. Secondary toothed slightly but faint, at broad angles. Margins at the numerous the terminal 40%; teeth have a light dot the male only Inflorescence in (spring) ascending catkins: dark; tip. broad purple scales, their tips acuminate and with female with a tuft of long purple stigmas. Fruit tiny, yellow-green, the sessile, egg-shaped, with a tooth-like tip and dark, thread-like flower remnants, highly aromatic, in a cone-like spike 1 cm long, ripening in late summer, exuding a yellow-orange wax (visible if pressed on paper). HABITAT: Shorelines in full sun, especially with infertile rock, gravel, or sand; often on thin peat or muck over such material, but rarely in floating bogs. Native. FOOD USE: Leaves can be used to brew a tea or as a sea- soning in broths, like bay leaf. Flower buds and fruits can be used similarly and are more aromatic. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Often extremely abundant in Northwoods lake country, perfuming the shoreline breeze on hot summer days. 184 