BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS
13 Leatherleaf 15"
Chamaedaphne calyculata
Ericaceae (Heath family)
leaves. ID difficulty 2.
QUICK CHECK: Waist-high bush of boggy shores with tough, evergreen, alliptic. antire
DESCRIPTION: Shrub spreading by rhizomes to form colonies. Stems in dense clumps,
to 4' (1.2 m) tall and 0.6" (15 mm) thick, curved and crooked but the new growth erect. The
wood is light green. Bark finely shredding, reddish and smooth beneath the papery layer
Twigs slightly zigzag, hairy in the first year. Leaf buds tiny; flower buds much larger and
pointed, on short stalks. Leaves elliptic with a blunt point at both ends, up to 1.6" (4 cm) but drastically and
progressively reduced in size toward the tips of flowering branches (some as small as 2 mm), held vertically or nearly
appressed to the twig, often recurved. Blades hairless on both sides, green and glossy above dotted with soar se
silvery scales; densely covered with red-brown or pale gray scales below. Margins hairless, downcurved. entire
or with tiny irregular bump-teeth, mostly toward the tip. Midvein slightly depressed above, slightly protrud-
ing below; secondary veins faint but several, 55-70°. The petiole and lower midvein are maroon on new leaves
Petioles 10% of blade length. Flowers borne singly on drooping pedicels from the axils of reduced terminal
leaves, the corolla white and urn-shaped, the opening with 5 small lobes and a slightly protruding style, the
base hugged by 5 triangular brown sepals about one third the length of the corolla. Fruit a 5-part capsule, the
end somewhat flattened, the sepals and long style persistent, ripening in fall.
HABITAT: Acidic bogs and boggy shorelines in full sun. Native.
FOOD USE: Leaves can be used for tea, fresh or dried. Collect at any time of year. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This abundant bog shrub usually grows with the much better-known Labrador tea. Of the two
1 think leatherleaf makes a better beverage. When boiling, it gives off a similar scent but imparts more flavor.
187
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS 13 Leatherleaf 15" Chamaedaphne calyculata Ericaceae (Heath family) leaves. ID difficulty 2. QUICK CHECK: Waist-high bush of boggy shores with tough, evergreen, alliptic. antire DESCRIPTION: Shrub spreading by rhizomes to form colonies. Stems in dense clumps, to 4' (1.2 m) tall and 0.6" (15 mm) thick, curved and crooked but the new growth erect. The wood is light green. Bark finely shredding, reddish and smooth beneath the papery layer Twigs slightly zigzag, hairy in the first year. Leaf buds tiny; flower buds much larger and pointed, on short stalks. Leaves elliptic with a blunt point at both ends, up to 1.6" (4 cm) but drastically and progressively reduced in size toward the tips of flowering branches (some as small as 2 mm), held vertically or nearly appressed to the twig, often recurved. Blades hairless on both sides, green and glossy above dotted with soar se silvery scales; densely covered with red-brown or pale gray scales below. Margins hairless, downcurved. entire or with tiny irregular bump-teeth, mostly toward the tip. Midvein slightly depressed above, slightly protrud- ing below; secondary veins faint but several, 55-70°. The petiole and lower midvein are maroon on new leaves Petioles 10% of blade length. Flowers borne singly on drooping pedicels from the axils of reduced terminal leaves, the corolla white and urn-shaped, the opening with 5 small lobes and a slightly protruding style, the base hugged by 5 triangular brown sepals about one third the length of the corolla. Fruit a 5-part capsule, the end somewhat flattened, the sepals and long style persistent, ripening in fall. HABITAT: Acidic bogs and boggy shorelines in full sun. Native. FOOD USE: Leaves can be used for tea, fresh or dried. Collect at any time of year. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This abundant bog shrub usually grows with the much better-known Labrador tea. Of the two 1 think leatherleaf makes a better beverage. When boiling, it gives off a similar scent but imparts more flavor. 187 