BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS
17 Labrador tea
Ledum groenlandicum Ericaceae (Heath family)
QUICK CHECK: Evergreen bog shrub; leathery aromatic leaves with downcurved edges
and profuse wool underneath. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Widely-branching. loosely clumping shrub 1.5-3 (45-90 cm) high, weakly
erect to spreading. the bark gray, the twigs very densely woolly (brown on the newer growth,
whitish on the older). Leaves alternate, tough and leathery, evergreen, on very short woolly
petioles (nearly sessile). Blades 0.8-2.2" (2-5.6 cm) long, oblanceolate to narrowly elliptic,
tapered to a blunt point on both ends. Surface dark green and hairless above except along the depressed
midvein: rippled from depressions of the faintly visible secondary veins. Underneath they are aromatic and densely
matted with wool-white at first but reddish-brown on older leaves. Margins entire, strongly downcurved. Inflo-
rescence a crowded, terminal, umbel-like. rounded cluster of up to 40, the radiating green pedicels 0.4-0.9"
(1-2.3 cm) long. Flowers about 1 cm across with 5 separate, spreading, elongated, blunt-tipped, white petals
and 5-7 strongly protruding stamens. Fruit a brown capsule of 5 parts. splitting from the base rather than the
tip and drooping like a shooting star or cranberry flower.
HABITAT: Moist, acidic sites in full sun to partial shade: sphagnum bogs, muskegs, boggy margins of lakes,
rivers, and wetlands. Often persisting but never thriving in dense shade as the canopy closes. Occasionally
on thin-soiled rocky slopes and ledges. Native.
FOOD USE: Use leaves fresh or dried for tea.
Due to small amounts of the toxin ledol in the
leaves, some anti-foraging authorities advise
not to boil them-although many people do, and
I have never heard of this having any ill effect.
Boiling is fine as long as the tea is not drunk in
excessive amounts. This is a very well-estab-
lished traditional drink. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Despite the strong, distinctive,
and pleasant aroma of the leaves, the flavor
they impart is weak. To make a tea with any
strength requires a lot of leaves and steeping
time. Despite the weakness, this has long been
a popular tea across the North Country,
BROADLEAF SHRUBS WITH DRY FRUIT, NUTLETS, OR PODS 17 Labrador tea Ledum groenlandicum Ericaceae (Heath family) QUICK CHECK: Evergreen bog shrub; leathery aromatic leaves with downcurved edges and profuse wool underneath. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Widely-branching. loosely clumping shrub 1.5-3 (45-90 cm) high, weakly erect to spreading. the bark gray, the twigs very densely woolly (brown on the newer growth, whitish on the older). Leaves alternate, tough and leathery, evergreen, on very short woolly petioles (nearly sessile). Blades 0.8-2.2" (2-5.6 cm) long, oblanceolate to narrowly elliptic, tapered to a blunt point on both ends. Surface dark green and hairless above except along the depressed midvein: rippled from depressions of the faintly visible secondary veins. Underneath they are aromatic and densely matted with wool-white at first but reddish-brown on older leaves. Margins entire, strongly downcurved. Inflo- rescence a crowded, terminal, umbel-like. rounded cluster of up to 40, the radiating green pedicels 0.4-0.9" (1-2.3 cm) long. Flowers about 1 cm across with 5 separate, spreading, elongated, blunt-tipped, white petals and 5-7 strongly protruding stamens. Fruit a brown capsule of 5 parts. splitting from the base rather than the tip and drooping like a shooting star or cranberry flower. HABITAT: Moist, acidic sites in full sun to partial shade: sphagnum bogs, muskegs, boggy margins of lakes, rivers, and wetlands. Often persisting but never thriving in dense shade as the canopy closes. Occasionally on thin-soiled rocky slopes and ledges. Native. FOOD USE: Use leaves fresh or dried for tea. Due to small amounts of the toxin ledol in the leaves, some anti-foraging authorities advise not to boil them-although many people do, and I have never heard of this having any ill effect. Boiling is fine as long as the tea is not drunk in excessive amounts. This is a very well-estab- lished traditional drink. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Despite the strong, distinctive, and pleasant aroma of the leaves, the flavor they impart is weak. To make a tea with any strength requires a lot of leaves and steeping time. Despite the weakness, this has long been a popular tea across the North Country, 