WOODY VINES AND CREEPERS
teeth-varying dominant central from axis small (like to very large depending on species Inflorescence
and unshowy, male and a domestic grape cluster) borne opposite Flowers an
the flower Fruit female on different vines, with 5 petals lused at the tip to form coarly summer) mali
loom, the opens. inside spherical, 0.2-0.7" (5-18 mm), with thir k, deep purple skin often acap that coated drops off with
juicy, containing 1-4 large, ovoid, semi-hard seeds, ripening in late summer heavily to fall
CONFUSING habitat. PLANTS: Several woody vines have similar fruit-and these are frequently found
same Virginia creeper and woodbine have palmately compound leaves, non-shaggy stems, growing and in the
fruit clusters. On woodbine, the fruit stems are bright pink. These species have acrid juice that tastes unpleas- sparser
ant and leaves a burning sensation in the mouth, but they are not particularly dangerous. Canada sead
(poisonous, p. 662) contain a single crescent-shaped seed. Moonseed vines spiral around their supports (grape
ines do not) and are much thinner than grape vines, greenish, and never shaggy. Moonseed leaves ack 'eeth
on their margins. False grape Ampelopsis cordata has leaves much like those of wild grape, but it has very 'ew
tendrils. The fruit grows in a wide, dichotomously forked cluster; it ripens to turquoise blue with raised corky
dots on the skin and is never quite spherical. This fruit is unpalatable but not dangerous.
HABITAT: River floodplains, roadsides, empty urban lots, fences, forest edges, steep slopes, and other dis-
turbed, sunny locations. Sometimes found in the canopies of mature hardwood forests. Native
FOOD USE: Young tendrils and growing tips make a tangy snack in spring and early summer, popular with
children. Young leaves can be used as wraps for stuffed grape leaves (dolmades). For this purpose they are
best when nearly full-sized but still tender. The fruit can be used to make pie, juice, jelly, jam, or wine-the
quality varies greatly by species. Some wild grapes are tiny and very sour with little pulp. If the flavor is too
strong wild grape juice can be mixed with a milder fruit, such as apple, to make superior jelly. Conservation 1.
CAUTION: Many of the smaller wild grapes are high in tartrate and calcium oxalate, which should be removed
before use. (It will make jam or jelly gritty, and in juice it will irritate your mouth and throat). Tartrate settles
to the bottom of a container of juice as a grayish sludge after a day or two; the good juice can be poured off
the top.
COMMENTS: Wild grapes are widespread
and abundant in most of the East, and can
make superb products even though many
are too sour to enjoy raw.
SPECIES: Several in our area: A few rep-
resentatives are pictured here and on the
next page.
(left) Grape vines have shredding bark.
(right) Wild grape panicle in flower.
(left) False grape (genus Ampelopsis)
(right) Wild grape tendrils.
NOT
189
EDIBLE
WOODY VINES AND CREEPERS teeth-varying dominant central from axis small (like to very large depending on species Inflorescence and unshowy, male and a domestic grape cluster) borne opposite Flowers an the flower Fruit female on different vines, with 5 petals lused at the tip to form coarly summer) mali loom, the opens. inside spherical, 0.2-0.7" (5-18 mm), with thir k, deep purple skin often acap that coated drops off with juicy, containing 1-4 large, ovoid, semi-hard seeds, ripening in late summer heavily to fall CONFUSING habitat. PLANTS: Several woody vines have similar fruit-and these are frequently found same Virginia creeper and woodbine have palmately compound leaves, non-shaggy stems, growing and in the fruit clusters. On woodbine, the fruit stems are bright pink. These species have acrid juice that tastes unpleas- sparser ant and leaves a burning sensation in the mouth, but they are not particularly dangerous. Canada sead (poisonous, p. 662) contain a single crescent-shaped seed. Moonseed vines spiral around their supports (grape ines do not) and are much thinner than grape vines, greenish, and never shaggy. Moonseed leaves ack 'eeth on their margins. False grape Ampelopsis cordata has leaves much like those of wild grape, but it has very 'ew tendrils. The fruit grows in a wide, dichotomously forked cluster; it ripens to turquoise blue with raised corky dots on the skin and is never quite spherical. This fruit is unpalatable but not dangerous. HABITAT: River floodplains, roadsides, empty urban lots, fences, forest edges, steep slopes, and other dis- turbed, sunny locations. Sometimes found in the canopies of mature hardwood forests. Native FOOD USE: Young tendrils and growing tips make a tangy snack in spring and early summer, popular with children. Young leaves can be used as wraps for stuffed grape leaves (dolmades). For this purpose they are best when nearly full-sized but still tender. The fruit can be used to make pie, juice, jelly, jam, or wine-the quality varies greatly by species. Some wild grapes are tiny and very sour with little pulp. If the flavor is too strong wild grape juice can be mixed with a milder fruit, such as apple, to make superior jelly. Conservation 1. CAUTION: Many of the smaller wild grapes are high in tartrate and calcium oxalate, which should be removed before use. (It will make jam or jelly gritty, and in juice it will irritate your mouth and throat). Tartrate settles to the bottom of a container of juice as a grayish sludge after a day or two; the good juice can be poured off the top. COMMENTS: Wild grapes are widespread and abundant in most of the East, and can make superb products even though many are too sour to enjoy raw. SPECIES: Several in our area: A few rep- resentatives are pictured here and on the next page. (left) Grape vines have shredding bark. (right) Wild grape panicle in flower. (left) False grape (genus Ampelopsis) (right) Wild grape tendrils. NOT 189 EDIBLE 