mm
0
WOODY VINES AND CREEPERS
Muscadine
3
Vitis rotundifolia
Vitaceae (Grape family)
QUICK CHECK: Bark not shaggy; roundish leaves with large tooth: small clusters
large, tough-skinned grapes. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Woody vine to 100' (30 m) long and 3.5" (9 cm) thick. Bark tight, and
finely bumpy; unlike other grapes it does not shred, although it sometimes flakes gray, off
the base on the largest stems. Tendrils unbranched. Thin branches often extend unsup- near
ported for 2-4' (60-120 cm). Twigs have numerous closely-spaced white dots (lenticels).
Leaves alternate, 2-4" (5-10 cm) long, round in outline with heart-shaped bases and abruptly pointed hos.
the margins not lobed, with large, broad teeth. Surface hairless or nearly so above and below Major veins
nearly flat to faintly protruding above. Petioles 90-120% of blade length. Flowers resembie those of other
grapes (see above). Grapes large, 0.6-1" (15-25 mm), greenish to purple or occasionally bronze colored when
ripe, the skins very thick with tiny warts, in small, not elongated clusters of less than 12 (usually 3-7), ripening in
fall, the grapes dropping once they ripen.
CONFUSING PLANTS: The false grape Ampelopsis cordata has very few tendrils and leaves that are more
finely toothed and tapered to a sharp tip. The fruits are smaller and more numerous per cluster.
HABITAT: Open young woods, forest edges; also sometimes in forest interiors. Native.
FOOD USE: Pluck the fruit from the vine or pick them up off the ground (their thick skins protect them from
damage). You can do all of the things with muscadines that are done with smaller grapes: eat them fresh, or
make superb jelly, wine, or juice. The flavor is milder and sweeter than that of smaller grapes, and the juice
contains less tartrate/calcium oxalate. Muscadines also lend themselves to uses that are impractical with
smaller grapes: They are delicious dried after the skins have been removed, and they can also be made into
pie. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This has the largest fruit of our native grapes and several cultivars have been bred. It is the
most genetically distinct of our grapes and is placed in its own genus by some taxonomists. I separate it from
other grapes here due to its many unique features.
(above) Ripe muscadines.
(top) Muscadine stems are not shaggy
Unripe muscadines. showing small clusters
191
mm 0 WOODY VINES AND CREEPERS Muscadine 3 Vitis rotundifolia Vitaceae (Grape family) QUICK CHECK: Bark not shaggy; roundish leaves with large tooth: small clusters large, tough-skinned grapes. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Woody vine to 100' (30 m) long and 3.5" (9 cm) thick. Bark tight, and finely bumpy; unlike other grapes it does not shred, although it sometimes flakes gray, off the base on the largest stems. Tendrils unbranched. Thin branches often extend unsup- near ported for 2-4' (60-120 cm). Twigs have numerous closely-spaced white dots (lenticels). Leaves alternate, 2-4" (5-10 cm) long, round in outline with heart-shaped bases and abruptly pointed hos. the margins not lobed, with large, broad teeth. Surface hairless or nearly so above and below Major veins nearly flat to faintly protruding above. Petioles 90-120% of blade length. Flowers resembie those of other grapes (see above). Grapes large, 0.6-1" (15-25 mm), greenish to purple or occasionally bronze colored when ripe, the skins very thick with tiny warts, in small, not elongated clusters of less than 12 (usually 3-7), ripening in fall, the grapes dropping once they ripen. CONFUSING PLANTS: The false grape Ampelopsis cordata has very few tendrils and leaves that are more finely toothed and tapered to a sharp tip. The fruits are smaller and more numerous per cluster. HABITAT: Open young woods, forest edges; also sometimes in forest interiors. Native. FOOD USE: Pluck the fruit from the vine or pick them up off the ground (their thick skins protect them from damage). You can do all of the things with muscadines that are done with smaller grapes: eat them fresh, or make superb jelly, wine, or juice. The flavor is milder and sweeter than that of smaller grapes, and the juice contains less tartrate/calcium oxalate. Muscadines also lend themselves to uses that are impractical with smaller grapes: They are delicious dried after the skins have been removed, and they can also be made into pie. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This has the largest fruit of our native grapes and several cultivars have been bred. It is the most genetically distinct of our grapes and is placed in its own genus by some taxonomists. I separate it from other grapes here due to its many unique features. (above) Ripe muscadines. (top) Muscadine stems are not shaggy Unripe muscadines. showing small clusters 191 