0
WOODY VINES AND CREEPERS
4
Greenbrier
1-3
genus Smilax (in part)
Smilacaceae (formerly Liliaceae, Lily family)
UICK CHECK: Green stems with thorns or spines, tendrils, and entire leaves with
parallel veins; flowers or fruit in umbels. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Medium-sized woody vines often forming dense thickets over brush,
variably armed with short spines or long needles, depending on species. Stems to 40'
(12 m) long, usually less than 0.8" (2 cm) thick, scarcely tapering, angled on some species
and rounded on others. Bark bright green or glaucous-green at first, often darkening to
nearly black with age, not shredded or peeling, sometimes with protruding white lenticels.
Composite
Shoots to 0.6" (15 mm) thick and often several feet long with large tendrils but only tiny
range
leaves or scales. Leaves simple, alternate, often evergreen or semi-evergreen, mostly ovate to heart-shaped
or rounded but on a few species they are long-elliptic, linear, or bulging at the base. Blades are glossy when
young, tough when mature, and mostly hairless. Midvein and major veins are depressed above and strongly
protruding below, but smaller veins are flat to faintly raised above. There are 1-3 prominent parallel veins on each
side of the midvein, arching out from the base and converging at the tip. Margins entire but occasionally spiry.
Petioles 5-15% of blade length, grooved and sheathed, with stipules or tendrils attached to the sides. Inflores-
cence a tight spherical umbel of 6-30 at the end of a peduncle from a leaf axil, the cluster 1-2" (2.5-5 cm,
across. Flowers (early summer) male and female on different
plants, very small and yellow-green, with 6 tepals arranged in
two layers, the male flowers with 6 stamens. Fruit spherical
or nearly so, 4-10 mm, smooth-skinned, ripening dark blue-
black, the flesh pulpy to mealy with one to several large seeds.
SPECIES: There are many species in our region; a few repre-
sentatives are pictured here and on the next page.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Carrion flowers (p. 494) are herba-
ceous members of the same genus. They have proportionately
much thicker stems and lack thorns, and are similarly edible.
HABITAT: Edges of fields, roadsides, thickets, fencerows,
young or open woods, streamsides. Native.
Greenbrier fruits.
FOOD USE: The rhizomes or tubers of some species have been used to make a nourishing drink. For this reddish they
were apparently details are nebulous, and it is not fully clear which species were used or preferred. hard and woody
pounded, after which the starch was settled out in water, then boiled to make the My experi-
drink. These have so far been unsuccessful-the tubers I have unearthed were shockingly occasionally later.
ments Shoots with and this young greens can be eaten raw or cooked from spring to early summer and
These vary in flavor from slightly bitter to pleasantly tangy. Conservation 3/1.
can be tricky to identify to species, but are easy to recognize climbing as a vines group: that there are
COMMENTS: Greenbriers in our region with tendrils and green stems, and there are no page.) other
prickly. are no other One vines species, S. walteri, has red berries. (Images continued on the next
Tubers from S. laurifolia and 5. glauca (I forget which is which). had no luck extracting starch from either one 193
0 WOODY VINES AND CREEPERS 4 Greenbrier 1-3 genus Smilax (in part) Smilacaceae (formerly Liliaceae, Lily family) UICK CHECK: Green stems with thorns or spines, tendrils, and entire leaves with parallel veins; flowers or fruit in umbels. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Medium-sized woody vines often forming dense thickets over brush, variably armed with short spines or long needles, depending on species. Stems to 40' (12 m) long, usually less than 0.8" (2 cm) thick, scarcely tapering, angled on some species and rounded on others. Bark bright green or glaucous-green at first, often darkening to nearly black with age, not shredded or peeling, sometimes with protruding white lenticels. Composite Shoots to 0.6" (15 mm) thick and often several feet long with large tendrils but only tiny range leaves or scales. Leaves simple, alternate, often evergreen or semi-evergreen, mostly ovate to heart-shaped or rounded but on a few species they are long-elliptic, linear, or bulging at the base. Blades are glossy when young, tough when mature, and mostly hairless. Midvein and major veins are depressed above and strongly protruding below, but smaller veins are flat to faintly raised above. There are 1-3 prominent parallel veins on each side of the midvein, arching out from the base and converging at the tip. Margins entire but occasionally spiry. Petioles 5-15% of blade length, grooved and sheathed, with stipules or tendrils attached to the sides. Inflores- cence a tight spherical umbel of 6-30 at the end of a peduncle from a leaf axil, the cluster 1-2" (2.5-5 cm, across. Flowers (early summer) male and female on different plants, very small and yellow-green, with 6 tepals arranged in two layers, the male flowers with 6 stamens. Fruit spherical or nearly so, 4-10 mm, smooth-skinned, ripening dark blue- black, the flesh pulpy to mealy with one to several large seeds. SPECIES: There are many species in our region; a few repre- sentatives are pictured here and on the next page. CONFUSING PLANTS: Carrion flowers (p. 494) are herba- ceous members of the same genus. They have proportionately much thicker stems and lack thorns, and are similarly edible. HABITAT: Edges of fields, roadsides, thickets, fencerows, young or open woods, streamsides. Native. Greenbrier fruits. FOOD USE: The rhizomes or tubers of some species have been used to make a nourishing drink. For this reddish they were apparently details are nebulous, and it is not fully clear which species were used or preferred. hard and woody pounded, after which the starch was settled out in water, then boiled to make the My experi- drink. These have so far been unsuccessful-the tubers I have unearthed were shockingly occasionally later. ments Shoots with and this young greens can be eaten raw or cooked from spring to early summer and These vary in flavor from slightly bitter to pleasantly tangy. Conservation 3/1. can be tricky to identify to species, but are easy to recognize climbing as a vines group: that there are COMMENTS: Greenbriers in our region with tendrils and green stems, and there are no page.) other prickly. are no other One vines species, S. walteri, has red berries. (Images continued on the next Tubers from S. laurifolia and 5. glauca (I forget which is which). had no luck extracting starch from either one 193 