3 Raccoon grape
1
Ampelopsis arborea
Vitaceae (Grape family)
QUICK CHECK: Bark without shaggy strips, leaves twice compound; half-inch, purple,
grape-like fruit in small clusters. ID difficulty 2.
Woody vine, the stems to 50' (15 m) long and 3" (8 cm) thick. Bark lenticels; gray-
DESCRIPTION: small ridges (especially on younger growth) with scattered whitish opposite
it does (opposing tendril), 3-9" (8-23 cm) long, twice compound,
brown with not shred in long strips like grapes. Tendrils branching, woody and stiff,
a leaf. Leaves or ternate alternate at each division, a with 9-33 leaflets. Rachises are hairy, especially toward blade length. the leaflets. Leaf-
pinnate than wide, channeled faintly or not at all, sparsely hairy, 20-120% of the lobes
lets Petioles 0.6-2.4" deeper (15-24 mm) long, sessile or on very short petiolules, ovate in outline with a few or below. very
teeth. Hairs scattered beneath, mostly on major veins. Veins depressed above and protruding branches
Inflorescence large a cluster of 3-28, much shorter than the leaves, widely forking at first but the final
densely-packed and umbel-like (but not really an umbel). Flowers (early summer) tiny, off-white, with 5 petals
and 5 stamens. In fruit the cluster stems are green. Berries black, almost spherical but slightly broader than
long, usually touching in the cluster, the skin shiny with tiny whitish spots. The inside is juicy with reticulate
flesh, the liquid almost clear but faintly purple. Seeds 3. greenish, about 4 mm long and nearly as wide, flat
on one or two faces and rounded on the outer face.
HABITAT: In full to partial sun where well drained: young forests, open woodlands, forest edges, fence lines,
roadsides, brushy areas. Native.
FOOD USE: Collect fruit when ripe and use like wild grapes. The flesh is faintly irritating to the mouth, which
can be alleviated in juice by letting it sit overnight in the fridge and then decanting the sludge-free liquid on
top (as with wild grapes). Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: These are like lame, bland grapes-edible but not very exciting. Despite being usually reported
as inedible, they are better than the worse species of wild grapes and taste much better than our other species
of Ampelopsis. AKA pepper vine-1 have no idea why it is called this, or why it has the species name arborea
(tree-like).
192
3 Raccoon grape 1 Ampelopsis arborea Vitaceae (Grape family) QUICK CHECK: Bark without shaggy strips, leaves twice compound; half-inch, purple, grape-like fruit in small clusters. ID difficulty 2. Woody vine, the stems to 50' (15 m) long and 3" (8 cm) thick. Bark lenticels; gray- DESCRIPTION: small ridges (especially on younger growth) with scattered whitish opposite it does (opposing tendril), 3-9" (8-23 cm) long, twice compound, brown with not shred in long strips like grapes. Tendrils branching, woody and stiff, a leaf. Leaves or ternate alternate at each division, a with 9-33 leaflets. Rachises are hairy, especially toward blade length. the leaflets. Leaf- pinnate than wide, channeled faintly or not at all, sparsely hairy, 20-120% of the lobes lets Petioles 0.6-2.4" deeper (15-24 mm) long, sessile or on very short petiolules, ovate in outline with a few or below. very teeth. Hairs scattered beneath, mostly on major veins. Veins depressed above and protruding branches Inflorescence large a cluster of 3-28, much shorter than the leaves, widely forking at first but the final densely-packed and umbel-like (but not really an umbel). Flowers (early summer) tiny, off-white, with 5 petals and 5 stamens. In fruit the cluster stems are green. Berries black, almost spherical but slightly broader than long, usually touching in the cluster, the skin shiny with tiny whitish spots. The inside is juicy with reticulate flesh, the liquid almost clear but faintly purple. Seeds 3. greenish, about 4 mm long and nearly as wide, flat on one or two faces and rounded on the outer face. HABITAT: In full to partial sun where well drained: young forests, open woodlands, forest edges, fence lines, roadsides, brushy areas. Native. FOOD USE: Collect fruit when ripe and use like wild grapes. The flesh is faintly irritating to the mouth, which can be alleviated in juice by letting it sit overnight in the fridge and then decanting the sludge-free liquid on top (as with wild grapes). Conservation 1. COMMENTS: These are like lame, bland grapes-edible but not very exciting. Despite being usually reported as inedible, they are better than the worse species of wild grapes and taste much better than our other species of Ampelopsis. AKA pepper vine-1 have no idea why it is called this, or why it has the species name arborea (tree-like). 192 