mm
Icm
WOODY VINES AND CREEPERS
Bittersweet
1
Celastrus scandens
family Celastraceae
QUICK CHECK: fruit Curvy, smooth-barked vine without tendrits, the leaves
lobed; orange, splitting open to reveal a red interior. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: without Vine or mound-forming shrub. Stems sinuous, curving gently,
tendrils, to 60' (18 m) long and 2" (5 cm) thick. Bark gray-brown and climbing
older stems; the bark of new growth is smoother, hairless, and green to greenish-brown smooth on
with brown lenticels. Inner bark is fibrous and green. When broken, stems
hollow with air chambers separated erratically by soft pithy membranes. young Leaf scars are
D-shaped to roughly triangular. Leaves alternate, 2-4" (5-10 long, ovate to obovate are or broadly
a long, acuminate tip and a broad, short-acuminate, or tapered base that is folded. Surfaces hairless. oval. the with
depressed above and protruding below. Margins have small, regular, blunt, often down-ourved teeth with veins
dark glandular tip. Petioles curved, 10% of blade length, with a shallow wing-channel. Inflorescence a termi- a
nal cluster of 10-24, slightly longer than wide. Flowers (late spring and early summer) 5-6 mm ar ross with
spreading, pale greenish-yellow petals. Fruit spherical to slightly oblong, 7-12 mm, the skin smooth, turning ;
bright orange in late summer, with a dark-tipped beak. Later, the outer flesh peels back in 3 lobes to reveal n red
interior that encloses 2 elongated whitish seeds. Pedicels 90-140% of fruit diameter, widening and turning
orange distally, the end with a 5-pointed calyx pressed against the base of the fruit.
HABITAT: Sunny woods, forest margins, oak savannahs, fence lines, steep hillsides, rocky areas and cliff
floodplain forests, young brushy woods. Native.
FOOD USE: After peeling the outer bark (all year, but especially winter), the inner bark can be scraped off
and chewed-it tastes pretty good, but the fibers must be spit out-or it can be boiled as a base for soups.
The tender shoots (spring and early summer) can be eaten raw or cooked. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: The inner bark has served as a winter famine food. The taste is better than I expected, and itis fun
to have something to collect in winter, but the shoots are more practical
RELATED EDIBLE: Asian bittersweet Celastrus orbiculatus 15 a com
mon invasive species, and in much of our region it is far more common
than the native. It is eliminating/diluting the native bittersweet through
genetic swamping and the two species are likely to converge over time
Asian bittersweet has rounder leaves and the fruit is borne in smaller
clusters from many leaf axils. The food uses are identical 1
Asian bitter sweet with
195
Asian bittersweet shoots
Bittersweet (native) with
unripe truit
berries.
mm Icm WOODY VINES AND CREEPERS Bittersweet 1 Celastrus scandens family Celastraceae QUICK CHECK: fruit Curvy, smooth-barked vine without tendrits, the leaves lobed; orange, splitting open to reveal a red interior. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: without Vine or mound-forming shrub. Stems sinuous, curving gently, tendrils, to 60' (18 m) long and 2" (5 cm) thick. Bark gray-brown and climbing older stems; the bark of new growth is smoother, hairless, and green to greenish-brown smooth on with brown lenticels. Inner bark is fibrous and green. When broken, stems hollow with air chambers separated erratically by soft pithy membranes. young Leaf scars are D-shaped to roughly triangular. Leaves alternate, 2-4" (5-10 long, ovate to obovate are or broadly a long, acuminate tip and a broad, short-acuminate, or tapered base that is folded. Surfaces hairless. oval. the with depressed above and protruding below. Margins have small, regular, blunt, often down-ourved teeth with veins dark glandular tip. Petioles curved, 10% of blade length, with a shallow wing-channel. Inflorescence a termi- a nal cluster of 10-24, slightly longer than wide. Flowers (late spring and early summer) 5-6 mm ar ross with spreading, pale greenish-yellow petals. Fruit spherical to slightly oblong, 7-12 mm, the skin smooth, turning ; bright orange in late summer, with a dark-tipped beak. Later, the outer flesh peels back in 3 lobes to reveal n red interior that encloses 2 elongated whitish seeds. Pedicels 90-140% of fruit diameter, widening and turning orange distally, the end with a 5-pointed calyx pressed against the base of the fruit. HABITAT: Sunny woods, forest margins, oak savannahs, fence lines, steep hillsides, rocky areas and cliff floodplain forests, young brushy woods. Native. FOOD USE: After peeling the outer bark (all year, but especially winter), the inner bark can be scraped off and chewed-it tastes pretty good, but the fibers must be spit out-or it can be boiled as a base for soups. The tender shoots (spring and early summer) can be eaten raw or cooked. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: The inner bark has served as a winter famine food. The taste is better than I expected, and itis fun to have something to collect in winter, but the shoots are more practical RELATED EDIBLE: Asian bittersweet Celastrus orbiculatus 15 a com mon invasive species, and in much of our region it is far more common than the native. It is eliminating/diluting the native bittersweet through genetic swamping and the two species are likely to converge over time Asian bittersweet has rounder leaves and the fruit is borne in smaller clusters from many leaf axils. The food uses are identical 1 Asian bitter sweet with 195 Asian bittersweet shoots Bittersweet (native) with unripe truit berries. 