WOODY VINES AND CREEPERS
7 Virginia creeper, woodbine
Parthenocissus quinquefolia and P. vitacea
Vitaceae (Grape family)
ID difficulty 2.
QUICK CHECK: Palmately compound leaf with 5 toothed leaflets; non-shaggy hack
DESCRIPTION: Woody vine or creeper, stems to 100' (30 m) long and 5" (13 cm)
climbing high in trees, creeping along the ground, or sprawling over boulders, brush, thick,
and fences. Bark gray when young, roughened by lenticels and small fissures, becoming
rough but never shaggy. Tendrils branched, growing opposite a leaf, Leaves alternate,
palmately compound with 5 leaflets. Petioles long and shallowly channeled. Leaflets
Composite
2.5-5" (6-13 cm) long, elliptic to obovate, pointed at both ends, variably hairy, turning red
range.
in fall. Midvein raised in a shallow valley above; secondary veins depressed. Margins toothless near the base
otherwise with large, sharp, forward-pointing teeth with claw-like tips. Inflorescence a branching uster
25-80. Flowers (mid summer) 5-6 mm across with 5 light green, recurved and boat-shaped petals Berry near
spherical, 4-10 mm, ripening to blue-black in late summer or early fall, juicy, with 3-4 seeds.
SPECIES: Both are commonly called Virginia creeper, although some people insist that this name only
to P. quinquefolia and that the proper name for P. vitacea is woodbine. P. vitacea has fruit clusters with
dichotomous-branching shape, the pedicels hot pink. The stems lack climbing roots. The bark of
becomes deeply furrowed and blocky. The tendrils usually lack enlarged tips. P. quinquefolia ras
smaller fruit in an elongated cluster with a dominant central axis and green pedicels. The stems often
aerial climbing roots and the tendrils have enlarged, pad-like tips.
HABITAT: Most wooded or brushy situations: mature forests, roadsides, fences, abandoned farms
orchards. Ranges from dry to moist sites. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather thick sections of stem any time of year, cut into manageable lengths, then peel the outer
bark. A thick, soft layer of inner bark then can be peeled off the woody core. Boil for at least 40 minutes. after
which it can be used like a starchy vegetable in stews or soup. Shoots are slightly tangy and can be eaten in
spring or early summer-they are better cooked. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: If you've ever wanted to eat a stick, here's your chance. It's not as bad as it sounds. Being ever
dead of winter, and often in great quantity, this is an excellent survival food, in case of the you fruit,
available want to survive. in the Eaten raw or undercooked, the bark has the same unpleasant irritating quality
but this is destroyed by prolonged cooking.
WARNING: The berries of these plants are not edible! They
are acrid and cause discomfort in the mouth and throat if
ingested. A few sources list them as edible, but I have tried
them many times and recommend against it.
P. vitacede, showing layers of the peeled stem.
NOT
197
P vitaced leaf
P. vitacea fruit.
Virginia creeper shoot.
WOODY VINES AND CREEPERS 7 Virginia creeper, woodbine Parthenocissus quinquefolia and P. vitacea Vitaceae (Grape family) ID difficulty 2. QUICK CHECK: Palmately compound leaf with 5 toothed leaflets; non-shaggy hack DESCRIPTION: Woody vine or creeper, stems to 100' (30 m) long and 5" (13 cm) climbing high in trees, creeping along the ground, or sprawling over boulders, brush, thick, and fences. Bark gray when young, roughened by lenticels and small fissures, becoming rough but never shaggy. Tendrils branched, growing opposite a leaf, Leaves alternate, palmately compound with 5 leaflets. Petioles long and shallowly channeled. Leaflets Composite 2.5-5" (6-13 cm) long, elliptic to obovate, pointed at both ends, variably hairy, turning red range. in fall. Midvein raised in a shallow valley above; secondary veins depressed. Margins toothless near the base otherwise with large, sharp, forward-pointing teeth with claw-like tips. Inflorescence a branching uster 25-80. Flowers (mid summer) 5-6 mm across with 5 light green, recurved and boat-shaped petals Berry near spherical, 4-10 mm, ripening to blue-black in late summer or early fall, juicy, with 3-4 seeds. SPECIES: Both are commonly called Virginia creeper, although some people insist that this name only to P. quinquefolia and that the proper name for P. vitacea is woodbine. P. vitacea has fruit clusters with dichotomous-branching shape, the pedicels hot pink. The stems lack climbing roots. The bark of becomes deeply furrowed and blocky. The tendrils usually lack enlarged tips. P. quinquefolia ras smaller fruit in an elongated cluster with a dominant central axis and green pedicels. The stems often aerial climbing roots and the tendrils have enlarged, pad-like tips. HABITAT: Most wooded or brushy situations: mature forests, roadsides, fences, abandoned farms orchards. Ranges from dry to moist sites. Native. FOOD USE: Gather thick sections of stem any time of year, cut into manageable lengths, then peel the outer bark. A thick, soft layer of inner bark then can be peeled off the woody core. Boil for at least 40 minutes. after which it can be used like a starchy vegetable in stews or soup. Shoots are slightly tangy and can be eaten in spring or early summer-they are better cooked. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: If you've ever wanted to eat a stick, here's your chance. It's not as bad as it sounds. Being ever dead of winter, and often in great quantity, this is an excellent survival food, in case of the you fruit, available want to survive. in the Eaten raw or undercooked, the bark has the same unpleasant irritating quality but this is destroyed by prolonged cooking. WARNING: The berries of these plants are not edible! They are acrid and cause discomfort in the mouth and throat if ingested. A few sources list them as edible, but I have tried them many times and recommend against it. P. vitacede, showing layers of the peeled stem. NOT 197 P vitaced leaf P. vitacea fruit. Virginia creeper shoot. 