6 Japanese honeysuckle
2
Lonicera japonica
family Caprifoliaceae
paired, entire leaves; large, paired, fragrant difficulty white flow- 2.
QUICK with CHECK: tubular No base tendrils; splitting into 2 asymmetrical lips; black berries. ID
ers a woody vine lacking tendrils, to 26' (8 m) long and 4" (10 turning cm) thick, red-
DESCRIPTION: tangles Twining the ground or climbing. Twigs hairy, green at first, paired
forming dense colored, on peeling off in narrow flaky strips on older trunks. Leaves range),
brown. Bark light mostly evergreen (tardily deciduous in its northern
but never fused, tough (2.5-8 and cm) long, obtuse at the base and abruptly pointed at the tip. Margins above except hairy
ovate to oblong, 1-3" on shoots, which often have leaves with large teeth or lobes. Surface hairless above. Peti-
and entire-except midvein; moderately soft-hairy below, especially along the veins. Veins are nearly summer) flat tubular,
oles along broader the than deep, nearly sessile to 8% of blade length. Flowers (late spring to early
1.2-2" (3-5 cm) long, highly fragrant, in pairs directly from the leaf axils or at the end of a short peduncle,
white at first but fading to dull yellow. Corolla a long, narrow, hairy tube suddenly diverging into 2 lips; one
lip is narrow, recurved, wider toward the tip; the other lip is much broader with the tip split into 4 lobes. The
pistil and stamens protrude prominently. There is a pair of reduced leaves beneath each pair of flowers, and a
pair of tiny, broad bracts at the base of each individual flower. Unopened flower buds are long, thin, club-like,
light green, and hairy. Fruit paired, spherical, about 5 mm, ripening to black in late summer or fall, containing
several black, shiny seeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Other vining honeysuckles have smaller flowers and fruit that does not ripen black.
HABITAT: Sunny to moderately shady well-drained soil, especially where fertile. Disturbed woodlots, fences,
forest edges, vacant lots, brushy areas, young or semi-open woods, steep banks, streamsides. It survives but
is less dominant in shady mature forests. Introduced. I
FOOD USE: Pluck mature white flowers, bite off the bottom, and suck the nectar from the base. Flowers can
also be eaten in salads, chopped up and
soaked for a drink, or dried for tea.
COMMENTS: Over much of our region this
is the most ecologically significant invasive
plant. This is one of the most accessible of
all wild edibles, but its culinary applications
are limited. The fruits are not edible. This
is à good nectar flower for hummingbirds,
and the scent of a blooming colony on a hot
June evening is amazing.
NOT
EDIBLE
Japanese honeysuckle young leaves.
6 Japanese honeysuckle 2 Lonicera japonica family Caprifoliaceae paired, entire leaves; large, paired, fragrant difficulty white flow- 2. QUICK with CHECK: tubular No base tendrils; splitting into 2 asymmetrical lips; black berries. ID ers a woody vine lacking tendrils, to 26' (8 m) long and 4" (10 turning cm) thick, red- DESCRIPTION: tangles Twining the ground or climbing. Twigs hairy, green at first, paired forming dense colored, on peeling off in narrow flaky strips on older trunks. Leaves range), brown. Bark light mostly evergreen (tardily deciduous in its northern but never fused, tough (2.5-8 and cm) long, obtuse at the base and abruptly pointed at the tip. Margins above except hairy ovate to oblong, 1-3" on shoots, which often have leaves with large teeth or lobes. Surface hairless above. Peti- and entire-except midvein; moderately soft-hairy below, especially along the veins. Veins are nearly summer) flat tubular, oles along broader the than deep, nearly sessile to 8% of blade length. Flowers (late spring to early 1.2-2" (3-5 cm) long, highly fragrant, in pairs directly from the leaf axils or at the end of a short peduncle, white at first but fading to dull yellow. Corolla a long, narrow, hairy tube suddenly diverging into 2 lips; one lip is narrow, recurved, wider toward the tip; the other lip is much broader with the tip split into 4 lobes. The pistil and stamens protrude prominently. There is a pair of reduced leaves beneath each pair of flowers, and a pair of tiny, broad bracts at the base of each individual flower. Unopened flower buds are long, thin, club-like, light green, and hairy. Fruit paired, spherical, about 5 mm, ripening to black in late summer or fall, containing several black, shiny seeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: Other vining honeysuckles have smaller flowers and fruit that does not ripen black. HABITAT: Sunny to moderately shady well-drained soil, especially where fertile. Disturbed woodlots, fences, forest edges, vacant lots, brushy areas, young or semi-open woods, steep banks, streamsides. It survives but is less dominant in shady mature forests. Introduced. I FOOD USE: Pluck mature white flowers, bite off the bottom, and suck the nectar from the base. Flowers can also be eaten in salads, chopped up and soaked for a drink, or dried for tea. COMMENTS: Over much of our region this is the most ecologically significant invasive plant. This is one of the most accessible of all wild edibles, but its culinary applications are limited. The fruits are not edible. This is à good nectar flower for hummingbirds, and the scent of a blooming colony on a hot June evening is amazing. NOT EDIBLE Japanese honeysuckle young leaves. 