WOODY VINES AND CREEPERS
8 Kudzu
Pueraria lobata 12 Fabaceae (Bean family)
QUICK CHECK: Tight bark, compound leaves with 3 broad, entire leaflets, purple pea-
flowers. and hairy pods. ID difficulty 1.
like sprawling or climbing vine from an enlarged root, thick, with the stems younger up to
DESCRIPTION: Large, older portions becoming woody and up to 3" (8 cm) with scattered
100' (30 thinner m) long, and the herbaceous. Woody portions are light gray-brown tips have long
raised growth lenticels, the bark not shredding bear tiny or flaky. new leaves Shoots and or rapidly are covered growing with fine black specks and and dense, compou lo
internodes 9-14" hairs (23-36 that lean cm). toward They the base; there are dark scales at the nodes. Leaves alternate round but sligh
stiff, straight enlarged at the base, to 20" (50 cm) long, not tapered, nearly
with three than leaflets. wide, with Petioles a small channel. Stipules 2-lobed, each lobe long, thin, and pointed. Leaflets or bulging 31
deeper drooping, broadly ovate to diamond-shaped (almost as broad as long) mi
(8-20 cm) with long, rounded often lobes, acuminate, the side leaflets lopsided on short petiolules with their own
the stipules. base The surface is faintly hairy above, with dense appressed hairs below. Secondary veins 45° to 1
midvein, raised above and much protruding below. Veinlets 90° to the secondary veins, often running unbrok
between them. Inflorescence a crowded, erect axillary spike-like raceme up to 10" (25 cm) long, the emp
lower rachis bumpy from the stubs of dropped pedicels. Flowers (late summer) pea-like, 0.5-0.8" (13-20 m
long, purple with a yellow portion on the interior of the largest lobe, fragrant with a grape-like scent. Frui
flattened, brownish pod up to 2" long, the surface with very long hairs, containing 1-7 seeds.
HABITAT: Roadsides, steep slopes, streambanks, forest edges; it likes ample sun and is usually found
erodible or disturbed sites-rarely in intact native vegetative communities. Introduced. I
FOOD USE: The enormous rootstocks can be dug all year but will contain the most food value when t
top is dormant. Clean, shred (easiest in a powerful blender), and then strain through a cloth to separate t
starch. Seek smaller vines; the roots of large vines are simply too big to dig. Commercially extracted in As
kudzu starch is nutritious and tasty and has many uses. In spring, the shoots and tender young leaves c
be eaten raw or cooked and have a mild, slightly green bean-like flavor. Flowers and flower buds can also
eaten as a vegetable.
COMMENTS: This is the well-known "weed that ate the South." The dense tangles that it
Small kudzu
forms as it smothers second-growth trees and shrubs are familiar to most who live within its
root.
range. It was introduced inten-
tionally from Asia in the early
1900s to reduce soil erosion.
198
Kudzu shoots
WOODY VINES AND CREEPERS 8 Kudzu Pueraria lobata 12 Fabaceae (Bean family) QUICK CHECK: Tight bark, compound leaves with 3 broad, entire leaflets, purple pea- flowers. and hairy pods. ID difficulty 1. like sprawling or climbing vine from an enlarged root, thick, with the stems younger up to DESCRIPTION: Large, older portions becoming woody and up to 3" (8 cm) with scattered 100' (30 thinner m) long, and the herbaceous. Woody portions are light gray-brown tips have long raised growth lenticels, the bark not shredding bear tiny or flaky. new leaves Shoots and or rapidly are covered growing with fine black specks and and dense, compou lo internodes 9-14" hairs (23-36 that lean cm). toward They the base; there are dark scales at the nodes. Leaves alternate round but sligh stiff, straight enlarged at the base, to 20" (50 cm) long, not tapered, nearly with three than leaflets. wide, with Petioles a small channel. Stipules 2-lobed, each lobe long, thin, and pointed. Leaflets or bulging 31 deeper drooping, broadly ovate to diamond-shaped (almost as broad as long) mi (8-20 cm) with long, rounded often lobes, acuminate, the side leaflets lopsided on short petiolules with their own the stipules. base The surface is faintly hairy above, with dense appressed hairs below. Secondary veins 45° to 1 midvein, raised above and much protruding below. Veinlets 90° to the secondary veins, often running unbrok between them. Inflorescence a crowded, erect axillary spike-like raceme up to 10" (25 cm) long, the emp lower rachis bumpy from the stubs of dropped pedicels. Flowers (late summer) pea-like, 0.5-0.8" (13-20 m long, purple with a yellow portion on the interior of the largest lobe, fragrant with a grape-like scent. Frui flattened, brownish pod up to 2" long, the surface with very long hairs, containing 1-7 seeds. HABITAT: Roadsides, steep slopes, streambanks, forest edges; it likes ample sun and is usually found erodible or disturbed sites-rarely in intact native vegetative communities. Introduced. I FOOD USE: The enormous rootstocks can be dug all year but will contain the most food value when t top is dormant. Clean, shred (easiest in a powerful blender), and then strain through a cloth to separate t starch. Seek smaller vines; the roots of large vines are simply too big to dig. Commercially extracted in As kudzu starch is nutritious and tasty and has many uses. In spring, the shoots and tender young leaves c be eaten raw or cooked and have a mild, slightly green bean-like flavor. Flowers and flower buds can also eaten as a vegetable. COMMENTS: This is the well-known "weed that ate the South." The dense tangles that it Small kudzu forms as it smothers second-growth trees and shrubs are familiar to most who live within its root. range. It was introduced inten- tionally from Asia in the early 1900s to reduce soil erosion. 198 Kudzu shoots 