family)
WOODY VINES AND CREEPERS
9
Wisteria
2
genus Wisteria
Fabaceae (Bean family)
QUICK CHECK: No tendrils, tight bark, pinnately compound
and large racemes of purple pea-like flowers. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: often much smaller, Woody vines with stems to 60' (18 m) long and up to 8"
bumps beside old New growth is pubescent, the buds silky and the stems thick but
leaf scars; older bark is gray-brown and bumpy but with notable
Leaves
shaggy long, the or leaflets scaly. Tendrils absent. Leaves alternate, pinnately compound, smoothish 4-16" and not
Leaflets typically not in plane with the rachis. Rachis thin, grooved, (10-400
arching. long, dark 7-15 (terminal leaflet present), ovate, entire, pointed, 1.5-3" and (4-8 often
green and somewhat glossy, finely hairy at first, becoming nearly hairless, cm)
very the rachis, short, hairy petiolules 2-3% of blade length. Inflorescence a drooping raceme on
rounded banner pedicels, and calyces densely hairy. Flowers (spring) 0.6-0.9" (15-23 mm) 4
like a сапору over two drooping wings hiding a keel, these parts light long,
yellow-green often zone at the base of the banner. Fruit a bean-like pod up to 6" (15 cm) long, somewhar purple
constricted between the large, brown seeds, ripening to brown in fall.
FOOD USE: Gather flowers when freshly opened in spring; strip whole clusters after shaking out
The flowers can be eaten raw or cooked in a variety of dishes, where they impart a pea-like flavor
note. They can be steeped to brew tea or even wine. Conservation 2 (frutescens).
COMMENTS: Wisteria produces an abundance of food and beauty. Flowering vines are hard
springtime. The flavor of the flowers is akin to black locust, only without the sweetness and touch
SPECIES: American wisteria W. frutescens is a native plant of rich forest edges and river and stream
The vines rarely exceed 1.5" (4 cm) thick. The inflorescence and calyces have a dense covering of thick-
glandular hairs, but the pod is hairless. This species flowers after the leaves are fully formed. The
4-9" (10-23 cm) long. Flowers at the base of the raceme open long before those at the tip. Chinese wisteria
W. sinensis is an introduced invasive plant of disturbed woods, roadsides, vacant lots, and urban areas. It
Flowers and Homerous
similar to the native wisteria in appearance, but is larger in most respects-the stems grow much thicker
flower clusters are 7-16" (18-40 cm) long, and the pod is hairy. The flowers open as the leaves emerge.
whole cluster ripens almost in unison. Chinese wisteria is generally more common than the native spacies
Chinese wisteria.
199
American wisteria.
family) WOODY VINES AND CREEPERS 9 Wisteria 2 genus Wisteria Fabaceae (Bean family) QUICK CHECK: No tendrils, tight bark, pinnately compound and large racemes of purple pea-like flowers. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: often much smaller, Woody vines with stems to 60' (18 m) long and up to 8" bumps beside old New growth is pubescent, the buds silky and the stems thick but leaf scars; older bark is gray-brown and bumpy but with notable Leaves shaggy long, the or leaflets scaly. Tendrils absent. Leaves alternate, pinnately compound, smoothish 4-16" and not Leaflets typically not in plane with the rachis. Rachis thin, grooved, (10-400 arching. long, dark 7-15 (terminal leaflet present), ovate, entire, pointed, 1.5-3" and (4-8 often green and somewhat glossy, finely hairy at first, becoming nearly hairless, cm) very the rachis, short, hairy petiolules 2-3% of blade length. Inflorescence a drooping raceme on rounded banner pedicels, and calyces densely hairy. Flowers (spring) 0.6-0.9" (15-23 mm) 4 like a сапору over two drooping wings hiding a keel, these parts light long, yellow-green often zone at the base of the banner. Fruit a bean-like pod up to 6" (15 cm) long, somewhar purple constricted between the large, brown seeds, ripening to brown in fall. FOOD USE: Gather flowers when freshly opened in spring; strip whole clusters after shaking out The flowers can be eaten raw or cooked in a variety of dishes, where they impart a pea-like flavor note. They can be steeped to brew tea or even wine. Conservation 2 (frutescens). COMMENTS: Wisteria produces an abundance of food and beauty. Flowering vines are hard springtime. The flavor of the flowers is akin to black locust, only without the sweetness and touch SPECIES: American wisteria W. frutescens is a native plant of rich forest edges and river and stream The vines rarely exceed 1.5" (4 cm) thick. The inflorescence and calyces have a dense covering of thick- glandular hairs, but the pod is hairless. This species flowers after the leaves are fully formed. The 4-9" (10-23 cm) long. Flowers at the base of the raceme open long before those at the tip. Chinese wisteria W. sinensis is an introduced invasive plant of disturbed woods, roadsides, vacant lots, and urban areas. It Flowers and Homerous similar to the native wisteria in appearance, but is larger in most respects-the stems grow much thicker flower clusters are 7-16" (18-40 cm) long, and the pod is hairy. The flowers open as the leaves emerge. whole cluster ripens almost in unison. Chinese wisteria is generally more common than the native spacies Chinese wisteria. 199 American wisteria. 