um
0
1cm
AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS
HABITAT: FOOD fertile sites USE: Margins where Rhizome the of bottom lakes, rivers, is sand, and gravel, other or open otherwise water, 00 firm. asionally Native. to (1m) deep. Usually STEMS found
tips
(summer)
are
good
white stem rities Pollen bases it terminal is collected be (spring portion by or leaning early that has summer) flowering not yet can heads produced be eaten over raw roots. or a raw container cooked, Mature or cooked; but rhizomes small. pull Break or are out off much the the soft, terrier. too whitish tough smooth in bottom eat skir Conder ned
processing. can Conservation used as flour. 2/2/1. Seeds (late summer) can be eaten and as tapping a hot cereal or shaking; or flour after after sifting labor. out intensive imnu part
COMMENTS: in North America, In England so many the accounts common confound name "bulrush" often refers to the plant that we
often erroneously attributed the two plants. The edible normally call "cattail"
similar in many ways, to the bulrush (Scirpus) in the American literature. properties The of the cattail ( Typhai are
not good except that for most uses cattail has larger edible uses bulrush of the rhizomes plants Ara
a source of starch because they are extremely tough. AKA Schoenoplectus parts. Mature validus.
RELATED EDIBLES: All bulrushes are theoretically edible, but this is the big one that is most worth
Young bulrush rhizomes have small, tender, white tips.
Bulrush heart, 50 tender it broke as
Mature bulrush rhizomes are tough and semi-woody.
I peeled it.
201
um 0 1cm AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS HABITAT: FOOD fertile sites USE: Margins where Rhizome the of bottom lakes, rivers, is sand, and gravel, other or open otherwise water, 00 firm. asionally Native. to (1m) deep. Usually STEMS found tips (summer) are good white stem rities Pollen bases it terminal is collected be (spring portion by or leaning early that has summer) flowering not yet can heads produced be eaten over raw roots. or a raw container cooked, Mature or cooked; but rhizomes small. pull Break or are out off much the the soft, terrier. too whitish tough smooth in bottom eat skir Conder ned processing. can Conservation used as flour. 2/2/1. Seeds (late summer) can be eaten and as tapping a hot cereal or shaking; or flour after after sifting labor. out intensive imnu part COMMENTS: in North America, In England so many the accounts common confound name "bulrush" often refers to the plant that we often erroneously attributed the two plants. The edible normally call "cattail" similar in many ways, to the bulrush (Scirpus) in the American literature. properties The of the cattail ( Typhai are not good except that for most uses cattail has larger edible uses bulrush of the rhizomes plants Ara a source of starch because they are extremely tough. AKA Schoenoplectus parts. Mature validus. RELATED EDIBLES: All bulrushes are theoretically edible, but this is the big one that is most worth Young bulrush rhizomes have small, tender, white tips. Bulrush heart, 50 tender it broke as Mature bulrush rhizomes are tough and semi-woody. I peeled it. 201 