AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS
GROUP 14 AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR
Here include plants that would typically in group be found 17. Since growing water in standing levels fluctuate, may water. sometimes Plants some that of
TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS
usually grow in moist be found soil away are placed from open water, if necessary. and moist soil plants
these be found plants in standing marshes may water. are the Check most biologically both groups productive requires ecosystems what I call the on Earth, "biomass and a
to Freshwater dominate strategy: under occupying such ideal all growing available conditions space to for exclude the production competitors. of toxins. This puts Thus this
the warfare" premium plants on in productivity this group tend and to leaves be incredibly little energy prolific and also mild in flavor. (But
is Nature, so of course edibles in this group that are not covered tasty. here. How- The
there are exceptions.)
tender parts because of their aquatic is
There are hundreds of almost of every potential sedge, rush, and grass are nontoxic small and size. usually Labor efficiency
ever, of most the most of these important are impractical determinants to use of food traditions. eat. Here I cover the larger
grass-like one plants that people have found practical to
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 14
The key is not your final answer!
1. Soft-stem bulrush
Plant with a tubular stem and no apparent leaves.
or
Leaves few, sheathing, borne at bulging nodes on a hollow stem.
2. Rice cutgrass
Stem flattened; panicle branches drooping: seeds egg-shaped.
3. Wild rice
or
Stem roundish; panicle branches ascending: seeds linear.
4. Sweet bulb-rush
Leaves not basal, distributed evenly along a spongy-solid triangular stalk.
or
Leaves all or mostly basal.
Leaves all basal, never keeled.
Leaves not flattened or sharp-edged, channeled near the base, less than 1 cm wide.
or
Seaside arrow-grass (see group 17).
Leaves flattened on one side, sharp-edged, never channeled, more than 2 cm wide.
5. Cattail
Leaves mostly basal but one or a few are borne on the stem; possibly keeled.
Leaf bundle not flattened; leaves keeled below, not side-slotted.
6. Great bur-reed
Leaves in a flattened bundle with sharp edges, one blade inserted into the slotted side of an
adjacent leaf. Leaves weakly keeled on both sides or not at all.
Flowers and fruits tiny, packed on a penis-like spike; leaves sweet-fragrant.
7. Calamus
Flowers large and showy; fruit a large pod; leaves not aromatic. Iris (not edible, p. 664).
1
Soft-stem bulrush
1
3
2
1
Scirpus validus 4 Cyperaceae (Sedge family)
QUICK CHECK: Leafless plant with a round vertical stem and a cluster of flowers droop-
THE to one side at the top. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a network of tough rhizomes, often growing in dense
colonies. Rhizome 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm) thick, hard and stiff, almost woody, crooked, light
orange-brown with numerous transverse rings and attached roots, the core fibrous.
Stems 3-8 (1-2.5 m) tall and up to 6" (15 mm) thick at the base, round in cross section,
smooth, spongy with hairless, 2-4 air chambers in the upper stem, soft (easily crushed by hand), tapered
which appears to glaucous be an gray-green, with no leaves. There is a single, erect, pointed very leaf gently, (bract) the surface
branches extension of the stem. Inflorescence a single, drooping cluster at the top,
late summer) emanating wind-pollinated from the same point and hanging to one side near the of the of several compound
tiny, brown, flat on one side and and convex inconspicuous, on the other. peeking out from the reddish-brown apex scales. stem. Flowers Seeds (achenes) (early to
200
AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS GROUP 14 AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR Here include plants that would typically in group be found 17. Since growing water in standing levels fluctuate, may water. sometimes Plants some that of TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS usually grow in moist be found soil away are placed from open water, if necessary. and moist soil plants these be found plants in standing marshes may water. are the Check most biologically both groups productive requires ecosystems what I call the on Earth, "biomass and a to Freshwater dominate strategy: under occupying such ideal all growing available conditions space to for exclude the production competitors. of toxins. This puts Thus this the warfare" premium plants on in productivity this group tend and to leaves be incredibly little energy prolific and also mild in flavor. (But is Nature, so of course edibles in this group that are not covered tasty. here. How- The there are exceptions.) tender parts because of their aquatic is There are hundreds of almost of every potential sedge, rush, and grass are nontoxic small and size. usually Labor efficiency ever, of most the most of these important are impractical determinants to use of food traditions. eat. Here I cover the larger grass-like one plants that people have found practical to TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 14 The key is not your final answer! 1. Soft-stem bulrush Plant with a tubular stem and no apparent leaves. or Leaves few, sheathing, borne at bulging nodes on a hollow stem. 2. Rice cutgrass Stem flattened; panicle branches drooping: seeds egg-shaped. 3. Wild rice or Stem roundish; panicle branches ascending: seeds linear. 4. Sweet bulb-rush Leaves not basal, distributed evenly along a spongy-solid triangular stalk. or Leaves all or mostly basal. Leaves all basal, never keeled. Leaves not flattened or sharp-edged, channeled near the base, less than 1 cm wide. or Seaside arrow-grass (see group 17). Leaves flattened on one side, sharp-edged, never channeled, more than 2 cm wide. 5. Cattail Leaves mostly basal but one or a few are borne on the stem; possibly keeled. Leaf bundle not flattened; leaves keeled below, not side-slotted. 6. Great bur-reed Leaves in a flattened bundle with sharp edges, one blade inserted into the slotted side of an adjacent leaf. Leaves weakly keeled on both sides or not at all. Flowers and fruits tiny, packed on a penis-like spike; leaves sweet-fragrant. 7. Calamus Flowers large and showy; fruit a large pod; leaves not aromatic. Iris (not edible, p. 664). 1 Soft-stem bulrush 1 3 2 1 Scirpus validus 4 Cyperaceae (Sedge family) QUICK CHECK: Leafless plant with a round vertical stem and a cluster of flowers droop- THE to one side at the top. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a network of tough rhizomes, often growing in dense colonies. Rhizome 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm) thick, hard and stiff, almost woody, crooked, light orange-brown with numerous transverse rings and attached roots, the core fibrous. Stems 3-8 (1-2.5 m) tall and up to 6" (15 mm) thick at the base, round in cross section, smooth, spongy with hairless, 2-4 air chambers in the upper stem, soft (easily crushed by hand), tapered which appears to glaucous be an gray-green, with no leaves. There is a single, erect, pointed very leaf gently, (bract) the surface branches extension of the stem. Inflorescence a single, drooping cluster at the top, late summer) emanating wind-pollinated from the same point and hanging to one side near the of the of several compound tiny, brown, flat on one side and and convex inconspicuous, on the other. peeking out from the reddish-brown apex scales. stem. Flowers Seeds (achenes) (early to 200 