0
1cm
AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS
Wild rice
3
III
FH-117
Zizania
palustris,
Z.
aquatica
Poaceae
OMICK than the CHECK: kernels. Large ID difficulty grass with 1. large rod-like seeds in raspy husks (Grass with APPLIC family)
DESCRIPTION: the water level has Annual grass that grows in water up to 4' (1.2
reaching the surface dropped. these Seedlings emerge first as submerged m) deep, aquatic or on mudilate if
stems 2-13' (0.6-4 float for several weeks before the leaves After
is low) 0.2-0.9" m) tall, unbranched, clumped (up to 70 per stems plant stand erect. Erect
each node. There (5-23 are mm) thick, roundish, hollow, smooth and hairless, where competition
long with sharp usually only 2-4 leaves per stem. Leaves 0,7-3" (18 80 enlarged above
proximally); a there tip. are Midvein 4-6 prominent, depressed above, enlarged, spongy, mm) stiffening wide an the
near the margins, prominent veins evenly spaced on each side. Surface hairless lenf (esper all,
Inflorescence an which are very rough when rubbed from tip to base, rougher on one and smooth the
often erect, Christmas-tree-shaped panicle 10-30" (25-75 cm) long with domic edge than
in rising far above the leaves on a naked stem; it may be spread wide or have all the di ant
tightly. Panicle branches are whorled or alternate and up to 7" (18 cm) long. The lower upper branc branc
and spreading, the upper female and ascending. Female flowers are inconspicuous, the male-dro-
showy (for a grass), up to 1 cm long. Seed rod-like, 0.3-1.1" (8-28 mm) long and 1.5-3 mm Mide
2-part husk that has stiff, raspy hairs, especially on the ridges, and a barbed awn much longer than
SPECIES: Northern wild rice Z. palustris has larger (er
vegetative parts tend to be smaller. Southern wild rice Z
is a larger plant with smaller kernels that tenas to 8000
lower water. Southern rice has copious amounts of
aromatic, sour-lemony lubricant on the panicle stems
reduced or absent in northern rice. The female portion
panicles of southern rice are always spread open when:
are ripe; on northern they often stay closed or spread only (gnal)
HABITAT: Shallow areas of lakes with inlets and outlets and
rivers. Wild rice needs very soft muck over a sand or grave.
bottom and is very sensitive to boat traffic and similar distur-
bance. Native.
FOOD USE: Harvest seeds in late summer to early autumn when
the kernels fall upon being struck gently. Propel a small watercraft
through the rice with a paddle or pole and knock the rice into the
boat with sticks. Wild rice needs to be dried, parched, rubbed
and winnowed before cooking (see 27). Conservation 1.
WARNING: Rice awns are tiny and barbed and
eyes, mouth, nose, ears, armpits and other
under finger and toe nails. Never put fresh green ?
your mouth-the hulls must be removed
COMMENTS: One of the iconic wild foods of North America, where this
excellent starchy staple, but the great majority of i:
is an market is cultivated. Although wild rice is widespread, Saskatch-
on the abundant in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Mis higan out the
is most Ontario. Both species can used similarly. Indigenous
ewan, and generally more efficient to harvest knowledge that
ern wild developed rice is a rich body of techniques All for and agens need tojoan
peoples practical use of this food possible. roods
them makes in protecting this and other native plant
Northern wild flowering
(top (top right) Northern wild nee me gram
.
Wild floating stage
3
0 1cm AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS Wild rice 3 III FH-117 Zizania palustris, Z. aquatica Poaceae OMICK than the CHECK: kernels. Large ID difficulty grass with 1. large rod-like seeds in raspy husks (Grass with APPLIC family) DESCRIPTION: the water level has Annual grass that grows in water up to 4' (1.2 reaching the surface dropped. these Seedlings emerge first as submerged m) deep, aquatic or on mudilate if stems 2-13' (0.6-4 float for several weeks before the leaves After is low) 0.2-0.9" m) tall, unbranched, clumped (up to 70 per stems plant stand erect. Erect each node. There (5-23 are mm) thick, roundish, hollow, smooth and hairless, where competition long with sharp usually only 2-4 leaves per stem. Leaves 0,7-3" (18 80 enlarged above proximally); a there tip. are Midvein 4-6 prominent, depressed above, enlarged, spongy, mm) stiffening wide an the near the margins, prominent veins evenly spaced on each side. Surface hairless lenf (esper all, Inflorescence an which are very rough when rubbed from tip to base, rougher on one and smooth the often erect, Christmas-tree-shaped panicle 10-30" (25-75 cm) long with domic edge than in rising far above the leaves on a naked stem; it may be spread wide or have all the di ant tightly. Panicle branches are whorled or alternate and up to 7" (18 cm) long. The lower upper branc branc and spreading, the upper female and ascending. Female flowers are inconspicuous, the male-dro- showy (for a grass), up to 1 cm long. Seed rod-like, 0.3-1.1" (8-28 mm) long and 1.5-3 mm Mide 2-part husk that has stiff, raspy hairs, especially on the ridges, and a barbed awn much longer than SPECIES: Northern wild rice Z. palustris has larger (er vegetative parts tend to be smaller. Southern wild rice Z is a larger plant with smaller kernels that tenas to 8000 lower water. Southern rice has copious amounts of aromatic, sour-lemony lubricant on the panicle stems reduced or absent in northern rice. The female portion panicles of southern rice are always spread open when: are ripe; on northern they often stay closed or spread only (gnal) HABITAT: Shallow areas of lakes with inlets and outlets and rivers. Wild rice needs very soft muck over a sand or grave. bottom and is very sensitive to boat traffic and similar distur- bance. Native. FOOD USE: Harvest seeds in late summer to early autumn when the kernels fall upon being struck gently. Propel a small watercraft through the rice with a paddle or pole and knock the rice into the boat with sticks. Wild rice needs to be dried, parched, rubbed and winnowed before cooking (see 27). Conservation 1. WARNING: Rice awns are tiny and barbed and eyes, mouth, nose, ears, armpits and other under finger and toe nails. Never put fresh green ? your mouth-the hulls must be removed COMMENTS: One of the iconic wild foods of North America, where this excellent starchy staple, but the great majority of i: is an market is cultivated. Although wild rice is widespread, Saskatch- on the abundant in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Mis higan out the is most Ontario. Both species can used similarly. Indigenous ewan, and generally more efficient to harvest knowledge that ern wild developed rice is a rich body of techniques All for and agens need tojoan peoples practical use of this food possible. roods them makes in protecting this and other native plant Northern wild flowering (top (top right) Northern wild nee me gram . Wild floating stage 3 