AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS
2
,
Zizaniopsis Rice cutgrass miliaceae 2002 Poaceae (Grass family)
clamping grass with flattened stems and difficulty sharp-edged 1. leaves,
QUICK CHECK! Very large the clamp. large drooping seedheads. ID
DESCRIPTION: leaning at the edge Perennial of grass forming dense the clumps, nodes. the Rhizomes center stems whitish, erect, about flattened the outer 0.5"
ones leaning or laving surface down scattered and often with rooting roots. at Stems rise 6-10' A flattened, (2-3 m) high, layered, two-ranked
cluster
of
4-6
and (13 mm) zigzag, sheaths thick, hairless the the lower and rather stem, smooth, the outermost up to 1.2" leaves (3 cm) smaller wide. ridge than on the the inner. back Blades near the to 4' base; (1.2 m) toward long, the about the tip
1" leaves (2.5 cm) wide. and flat deeply and ribbon-like channeled with with no a thick, inflated spongy ridge. Surface hairless off-center and almost vein smooth and several except other
they become nearly are and dangerous. There is one deeply depressed, divided from the free portion of the blade
edges, which raspy-sharp distributed. The sheath is numerous thin,
shallower grooves "stretch that are zone" irregularly (ligule). Inflorescence a panicle 10-32" about (25-80 as high cm) or long slightly with higher than the
tallest delicate, leaves. drooping Flowers (mostly April-June) tiny and inconspicuous. Seeds egg-shaped,
by a light green branches, the central rachis also drooping, rising about 2 mm long,
enclosed in chaff with a short awn, ripening mostly May-July.
HABITAT: Shallow, mucky areas: pond and lake edges, marshes, and riverine wetlands, Native. especially near the
coast, in fresh or brackish water. Often in shade but only fruits well in full sun.
Tender stem bases (spring and early summer) can be peeled and eaten raw or cooked. summer) Lateral
shoots FOOD USE: of fast-growing rhizomes (summer) are tender and delicious. Seeds (late spring or early
can be harvested by
beating, like wild rice,
and processed by rub-
bing and winnowing.
Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: If lived
in the South I would
adapt the techniques
used for wild rice and
make this one of my
staple foods. AKA gi-
ant cutgrass or south-
em wild rice, but the
latter name is better
reserved for Zizania
aquatica.
202
AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS 2 , Zizaniopsis Rice cutgrass miliaceae 2002 Poaceae (Grass family) clamping grass with flattened stems and difficulty sharp-edged 1. leaves, QUICK CHECK! Very large the clamp. large drooping seedheads. ID DESCRIPTION: leaning at the edge Perennial of grass forming dense the clumps, nodes. the Rhizomes center stems whitish, erect, about flattened the outer 0.5" ones leaning or laving surface down scattered and often with rooting roots. at Stems rise 6-10' A flattened, (2-3 m) high, layered, two-ranked cluster of 4-6 and (13 mm) zigzag, sheaths thick, hairless the the lower and rather stem, smooth, the outermost up to 1.2" leaves (3 cm) smaller wide. ridge than on the the inner. back Blades near the to 4' base; (1.2 m) toward long, the about the tip 1" leaves (2.5 cm) wide. and flat deeply and ribbon-like channeled with with no a thick, inflated spongy ridge. Surface hairless off-center and almost vein smooth and several except other they become nearly are and dangerous. There is one deeply depressed, divided from the free portion of the blade edges, which raspy-sharp distributed. The sheath is numerous thin, shallower grooves "stretch that are zone" irregularly (ligule). Inflorescence a panicle 10-32" about (25-80 as high cm) or long slightly with higher than the tallest delicate, leaves. drooping Flowers (mostly April-June) tiny and inconspicuous. Seeds egg-shaped, by a light green branches, the central rachis also drooping, rising about 2 mm long, enclosed in chaff with a short awn, ripening mostly May-July. HABITAT: Shallow, mucky areas: pond and lake edges, marshes, and riverine wetlands, Native. especially near the coast, in fresh or brackish water. Often in shade but only fruits well in full sun. Tender stem bases (spring and early summer) can be peeled and eaten raw or cooked. summer) Lateral shoots FOOD USE: of fast-growing rhizomes (summer) are tender and delicious. Seeds (late spring or early can be harvested by beating, like wild rice, and processed by rub- bing and winnowing. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: If lived in the South I would adapt the techniques used for wild rice and make this one of my staple foods. AKA gi- ant cutgrass or south- em wild rice, but the latter name is better reserved for Zizania aquatica. 202 