(Sedge
family)
AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS
The
after
neeling
Older
become
woody
FOOD USE: Young corms forming at stem bases, while still soft and white (from late spring to m
have a sugarcane flavor and are delicious raw or cooked. Lateral shoot tips (summer) are good
hard to gather. In spring, young stem bases can be pulled from the mud and peeled to reveal the tender
interior. This makes a good vegetable raw or cooked. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This plant is extremely prolific and can easily withstand human harvest-just as
muskrats, who relish the same parts. The immature tubers are an unsung delicacy. AKA river bulness
square, Scirpus fluviatilis.
5
Cattail
2
3
3
2
2
FH-87
genus Typha + Typhaceae (Cattail family)
QUICK CHECK: Smooth, vertical, sword-like leaves with hollow chambers in a round-
based cluster; sausage-shaped seedhead at the stem's apex. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial plant spreading by rhizome to form large colonies. Rhizomes 0.7-
1.2" (18-30 mm) thick and very long, not branching between stem bases, the surface tan to
reddish brown with occasional rings and scattered
white roots on all sides, the outer layer soft and
spongy, the center firm and stringy. Leaves basal, two-ranked, in a tight
rounded bundle, erect to strongly ascending, linear, sword-like. 3-8'
(1-2.4 m) tall and 0.7-1.3" (18-33 mm) wide, spongy inside. the surface
smooth and hairless with no depressions or ridges. Stalk straight, eract,
unbranched, solid, mostly hidden by leaves and only exposed densely- in the
part, which is 5-9 mm in diameter. Inflorescence a temale
upper spike of numerous tiny yellow flowers (male above, cm) not-
packed at the stalk's apex. These ripen into a 4-8" (10-20 parachute.
dog below) like head of densely packed seeds, each with a fluffy
PLANTS: Irises (p. 664) have proportionately rather broader than
CONFUSING less erect; their leaf clusters are flattened and finner.
rounded leaves that at are the base, and their rhizomes are short, stout
cattail T. latifolia is a more robust touching native Native. plant
SPECIES: male Common and female portions of the spike nearly leaves. stalks, and
with the angustifolia has narrower widely
Narrow-leaf and cattail the male T. and female portions of but the 'lds spike been are spreading
rhizomes, native near the coast common.
separated. wetlands. This species Hybrids is between the two species are margin is
to interior Freshwater marshes, ditches the wet next depressions page)
HABITAT: of lakes, ponds, or rivers. (Continued on buds
Cattail spikes, the left ready for eating the Howel
205
the right ready for collecting pollen
(Sedge family) AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS The after neeling Older become woody FOOD USE: Young corms forming at stem bases, while still soft and white (from late spring to m have a sugarcane flavor and are delicious raw or cooked. Lateral shoot tips (summer) are good hard to gather. In spring, young stem bases can be pulled from the mud and peeled to reveal the tender interior. This makes a good vegetable raw or cooked. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This plant is extremely prolific and can easily withstand human harvest-just as muskrats, who relish the same parts. The immature tubers are an unsung delicacy. AKA river bulness square, Scirpus fluviatilis. 5 Cattail 2 3 3 2 2 FH-87 genus Typha + Typhaceae (Cattail family) QUICK CHECK: Smooth, vertical, sword-like leaves with hollow chambers in a round- based cluster; sausage-shaped seedhead at the stem's apex. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial plant spreading by rhizome to form large colonies. Rhizomes 0.7- 1.2" (18-30 mm) thick and very long, not branching between stem bases, the surface tan to reddish brown with occasional rings and scattered white roots on all sides, the outer layer soft and spongy, the center firm and stringy. Leaves basal, two-ranked, in a tight rounded bundle, erect to strongly ascending, linear, sword-like. 3-8' (1-2.4 m) tall and 0.7-1.3" (18-33 mm) wide, spongy inside. the surface smooth and hairless with no depressions or ridges. Stalk straight, eract, unbranched, solid, mostly hidden by leaves and only exposed densely- in the part, which is 5-9 mm in diameter. Inflorescence a temale upper spike of numerous tiny yellow flowers (male above, cm) not- packed at the stalk's apex. These ripen into a 4-8" (10-20 parachute. dog below) like head of densely packed seeds, each with a fluffy PLANTS: Irises (p. 664) have proportionately rather broader than CONFUSING less erect; their leaf clusters are flattened and finner. rounded leaves that at are the base, and their rhizomes are short, stout cattail T. latifolia is a more robust touching native Native. plant SPECIES: male Common and female portions of the spike nearly leaves. stalks, and with the angustifolia has narrower widely Narrow-leaf and cattail the male T. and female portions of but the 'lds spike been are spreading rhizomes, native near the coast common. separated. wetlands. This species Hybrids is between the two species are margin is to interior Freshwater marshes, ditches the wet next depressions page) HABITAT: of lakes, ponds, or rivers. (Continued on buds Cattail spikes, the left ready for eating the Howel 205 the right ready for collecting pollen 