AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS
2
2
Sweet
bulb-rush
3
4
Cyperaceae
(Sedge
family)
Bolboschoenus CHECK: in colonies; large, smooth, 3-sided leafy stem; 1. leaves grass-like, grooved,
fluviatilis
QUICK stem rather than at the base. ID difficulty
borne on the spreading by rhizome to form large and and often tough pure
DESCRIPTION: Robust 8-13 perennial mm thick, white inside with a spongy outer ones become layer very a dark
colonies. Rhizomes light the outside, but older (15-28 mm)
cord in the middle; Tuber new (or ones corm, are but not on a bulb as the name suggests) 0,6-1,1" older; occurring in
brown in diameter, to black. white and soft A scaly when sheath young, attaches dark and to wooden-hard a ring around the when tuber; there is a bud at the at the bottom end, but and green a few
chains on older rhizomes. never branching, dark purple-brown (2 cm) thick.
higher up, triangular Leaves (but not the basal, leaf distributed evenly to the top of the stem, alternate, cm) long, tapered to
attached roots. Stems 3-6' (1-2 m) clusters tall, erect, may be squared), smooth and hairless, ascending up to 0.8" with drooping
LYDS persistent. sheathing at the base, rough but not tough, hairless, 14-24" (36-60 section
tips, spongy inside, Blades have a sharp keel below and are gently arched on each side, creating at the a cross base; these
a very thin tip. lowercase M. New leaf clusters in spring have the lower sheaths fused leaves often surpass
clusters inflorescence, are which has 3-6 spreading bracts at its base. Inflorescence an umbel-like cluster
like a depressed 3-sided and the tender inner parts stain dark gray when broken. Upper of 10-20
the ou stalks of varying lengths up to 3" (8 cm). Flowers (early to mid summer) tiny, inconspicuous, linear
spikelets and not commonly produced. Seeds (achenes) 3-sided, 3.5-5 mm, pointed at both ends, with 6 toothed,
bracts beneath them.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Several other closely related bulrushes (Scirpus atrovirens, S. robustus, most notably)
are similar in appearance; all are similarly edible, just with smaller parts.
HABITAT: Muddy lakeshores and river banks, marshes. Full sun to moderate shade. Often forms large, pure
stands along the backwaters of flood-prone rivers. Native.
Has shows the form of di mature stalk, but they typically peeling. grow in dense colonies.
Shoot ready for
AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS 2 2 Sweet bulb-rush 3 4 Cyperaceae (Sedge family) Bolboschoenus CHECK: in colonies; large, smooth, 3-sided leafy stem; 1. leaves grass-like, grooved, fluviatilis QUICK stem rather than at the base. ID difficulty borne on the spreading by rhizome to form large and and often tough pure DESCRIPTION: Robust 8-13 perennial mm thick, white inside with a spongy outer ones become layer very a dark colonies. Rhizomes light the outside, but older (15-28 mm) cord in the middle; Tuber new (or ones corm, are but not on a bulb as the name suggests) 0,6-1,1" older; occurring in brown in diameter, to black. white and soft A scaly when sheath young, attaches dark and to wooden-hard a ring around the when tuber; there is a bud at the at the bottom end, but and green a few chains on older rhizomes. never branching, dark purple-brown (2 cm) thick. higher up, triangular Leaves (but not the basal, leaf distributed evenly to the top of the stem, alternate, cm) long, tapered to attached roots. Stems 3-6' (1-2 m) clusters tall, erect, may be squared), smooth and hairless, ascending up to 0.8" with drooping LYDS persistent. sheathing at the base, rough but not tough, hairless, 14-24" (36-60 section tips, spongy inside, Blades have a sharp keel below and are gently arched on each side, creating at the a cross base; these a very thin tip. lowercase M. New leaf clusters in spring have the lower sheaths fused leaves often surpass clusters inflorescence, are which has 3-6 spreading bracts at its base. Inflorescence an umbel-like cluster like a depressed 3-sided and the tender inner parts stain dark gray when broken. Upper of 10-20 the ou stalks of varying lengths up to 3" (8 cm). Flowers (early to mid summer) tiny, inconspicuous, linear spikelets and not commonly produced. Seeds (achenes) 3-sided, 3.5-5 mm, pointed at both ends, with 6 toothed, bracts beneath them. CONFUSING PLANTS: Several other closely related bulrushes (Scirpus atrovirens, S. robustus, most notably) are similar in appearance; all are similarly edible, just with smaller parts. HABITAT: Muddy lakeshores and river banks, marshes. Full sun to moderate shade. Often forms large, pure stands along the backwaters of flood-prone rivers. Native. Has shows the form of di mature stalk, but they typically peeling. grow in dense colonies. Shoot ready for 