5 Cattail Peel off (continued) the outer spongy layer of the rhizomes. rhizome and Cores chew can on be the dried core raw and raw, or ground sucking cooked. into out The flour, the heart starch after at
and FOOD spitting USE: out the fiber. Roasting out. Lateral sweetens shoots the are sweet and flavor delicious but when eaten eaten raw often causes immature mild
the which base the of in fibers the the leaf throat; can cluster be it sifted is in great spring cooked. and early In early summer summer is mild while and in nibble the leafy off the sheath flower still buds, encloses than or scrape the the female; them this off
green irritation flower spike, you vegetables. can boil or The steam male the flowers whole (top spikes section leaning of the the flowering spike) are spikes better over a pail pollen or bag mixed and
to part mix snaps with off grain easily or by hand. Pollen can spoilage, be collected then sifted by to remove insects Conservation and debris. Use 2/2/1
COMMENTS: with other This is one of our most versatile, productive, abundant, and delicious plants.
tapping. It flours should to be give dried baked to prevent foods a nice golden color and pleasant flavor. wild food
206
(top) (middle) Forming caltail rhizomes with lateral shoot
Mature cattail rhizome. (bottom) Cattail tips. hearts.
5 Cattail Peel off (continued) the outer spongy layer of the rhizomes. rhizome and Cores chew can on be the dried core raw and raw, or ground sucking cooked. into out The flour, the heart starch after at and FOOD spitting USE: out the fiber. Roasting out. Lateral sweetens shoots the are sweet and flavor delicious but when eaten eaten raw often causes immature mild the which base the of in fibers the the leaf throat; can cluster be it sifted is in great spring cooked. and early In early summer summer is mild while and in nibble the leafy off the sheath flower still buds, encloses than or scrape the the female; them this off green irritation flower spike, you vegetables. can boil or The steam male the flowers whole (top spikes section leaning of the the flowering spike) are spikes better over a pail pollen or bag mixed and to part mix snaps with off grain easily or by hand. Pollen can spoilage, be collected then sifted by to remove insects Conservation and debris. Use 2/2/1 COMMENTS: with other This is one of our most versatile, productive, abundant, and delicious plants. tapping. It flours should to be give dried baked to prevent foods a nice golden color and pleasant flavor. wild food 206 (top) (middle) Forming caltail rhizomes with lateral shoot Mature cattail rhizome. (bottom) Cattail tips. hearts. 