mm
1cm
AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS
6 Great bur-reed
1
2
2
2
G2
Sparganium
eurycarpum
Typhaceae
(Cattail
family)
QUICK CHECK: Leaves basal and on the stem, in non-flattened bundles, with
bottoms; stem zigzags between round flower clusters or spiky fruit balls. ID difficulty keeled 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by rhizome to form sometimes large colonies
Roots 2-3 mm thick, radiating from the base. Rhizomes usually less than 12" (30 cm) long
and 8 mm thick, the surface smooth with brown leafy sheaths, widening toward the end,
producing a small, semi-hard terminal tuber with a sheath at the base and an upturned
bud at the tip. Leaves sword-like, to 4' (120 cm) long and 0.3-0.8" (8-20 mm) wide, both basal and on the stem
(stem leaves shorter), strongly ascending, the tips sharp and not drooping. Basal leaf bundles are rounded to
roughly 4-sided. The lower part of the leaf is thick and folded, with some purple coloration. There is d V-groove
on the inside and a high, sharp ridge on the back. Distally the leaves are nearly flat and ribbon-like, without the
groove but still with a small keel. Stems strongly tapered, very zigzag, spongy-solid, rounded, rarely branched.
shorter than the tallest leaves. Flowers greenish to white, tiny, borne in tight round balls at intervals along the
zigzag stems, with female flowers near the base and male ones near the top. Fruit pointed, pyramid-shaoed.
green, each with a tough spike or "bur" at the end, packed tightly into a distinctive, hard, spiky ball like 0
head 1-1.5" (2.5-4 cm) across.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Sweet flag Acorus calamus has a distinctive sweet odor and side-slotted
Cattail has no keel running the length of the leaf.
HABITAT: Shallows of permanent water with a rich mucky bottom in full sun. Native.
FOOD USE: Tubers can be eaten while they remain tender, but are quite small and soon toughen.
shoots can be eaten throughout summer, but they are small. The heart at the base of the leaf clusters
be pulled in spring or early summer and eaten raw or cooked. In early to mid summer the tender flower sprke
shoot (well before the flowers appear) can be cooked as a vegetable. The immature flower bud clusters are
also edible raw or cooked. Conservation 2. (Continued on the next page.)
mm 1cm AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS 6 Great bur-reed 1 2 2 2 G2 Sparganium eurycarpum Typhaceae (Cattail family) QUICK CHECK: Leaves basal and on the stem, in non-flattened bundles, with bottoms; stem zigzags between round flower clusters or spiky fruit balls. ID difficulty keeled 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by rhizome to form sometimes large colonies Roots 2-3 mm thick, radiating from the base. Rhizomes usually less than 12" (30 cm) long and 8 mm thick, the surface smooth with brown leafy sheaths, widening toward the end, producing a small, semi-hard terminal tuber with a sheath at the base and an upturned bud at the tip. Leaves sword-like, to 4' (120 cm) long and 0.3-0.8" (8-20 mm) wide, both basal and on the stem (stem leaves shorter), strongly ascending, the tips sharp and not drooping. Basal leaf bundles are rounded to roughly 4-sided. The lower part of the leaf is thick and folded, with some purple coloration. There is d V-groove on the inside and a high, sharp ridge on the back. Distally the leaves are nearly flat and ribbon-like, without the groove but still with a small keel. Stems strongly tapered, very zigzag, spongy-solid, rounded, rarely branched. shorter than the tallest leaves. Flowers greenish to white, tiny, borne in tight round balls at intervals along the zigzag stems, with female flowers near the base and male ones near the top. Fruit pointed, pyramid-shaoed. green, each with a tough spike or "bur" at the end, packed tightly into a distinctive, hard, spiky ball like 0 head 1-1.5" (2.5-4 cm) across. CONFUSING PLANTS: Sweet flag Acorus calamus has a distinctive sweet odor and side-slotted Cattail has no keel running the length of the leaf. HABITAT: Shallows of permanent water with a rich mucky bottom in full sun. Native. FOOD USE: Tubers can be eaten while they remain tender, but are quite small and soon toughen. shoots can be eaten throughout summer, but they are small. The heart at the base of the leaf clusters be pulled in spring or early summer and eaten raw or cooked. In early to mid summer the tender flower sprke shoot (well before the flowers appear) can be cooked as a vegetable. The immature flower bud clusters are also edible raw or cooked. Conservation 2. (Continued on the next page.) 