mm
0
1cm
AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS
near 1.5-3.5" the (4-9 midpoint cm) long of the plant; above this the stem turns leafy with both
with hundreds of tiny and up to 0.7" (18 mm) wide, nearly erect, tapering edges sharo Spike sanis live
Fruits tiny, pale brown, flowers angled, or containing fruits forming 1-6 seeds. a continuous surface. Flowers gently tiny, to white, a blunt and up, inconspicuous Oacked tightly
SPECIES: viable seed. A. A. americanus calamus is is introduced native; its leaves thicken gradually to a gentle midvein ridge, and the
rippled, and the heads from Europe; its leaves have a sharp, abrupt midvein heads produce
all botanists. generally do not produce viable seed. The two are very similar and ridge not and separated are often by
CONFUSING PLANTS: Only irises (p. 664) have similarly side-slotted leaves, but iris leaves have TO promi-
nent keel and are not sweet-aromatic. The flowers and fruits are very different.
HABITAT: Lakeshores, river edges, reservoirs, estuaries; in shallow, often slow-
moving drainage waters that fluctuate in depth, where the bottom is shallow
mud over gravel or sand.
FOOD USE: Rhizomes can be collected all year; they are used medicinally or
as a flavoring for candy or syrup.
Their taste is extremely potent and
they should be used in moderation.
Tender hearts of leaf cluster bases
can be eaten raw or cooked. Young
spikes of immature flower buds are
fragrant, tasty, and mucilaginous.
Conservation 2/2/1.
COMMENTS: Calamus candy,
A. americanus leaf cross section.
made from the rhizomes, was
formerly sold commercially. This
plant is found across the northern
hemisphere and has long been
appreciated for its fabulous aroma.
Studies have shown a constituent
of the rhizomes of the old-world
species to be carcinogenic under
lab conditions. The leaves, and the
native North American species, are
not known to contain the carcino-
Young A. americanus plants
genic compound. AKA sweet flag.
A. calamus leaf cross section.
A. americanus rhizome.
Immature flower spike.
109
A. americanus peeled heart.
mm 0 1cm AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS near 1.5-3.5" the (4-9 midpoint cm) long of the plant; above this the stem turns leafy with both with hundreds of tiny and up to 0.7" (18 mm) wide, nearly erect, tapering edges sharo Spike sanis live Fruits tiny, pale brown, flowers angled, or containing fruits forming 1-6 seeds. a continuous surface. Flowers gently tiny, to white, a blunt and up, inconspicuous Oacked tightly SPECIES: viable seed. A. A. americanus calamus is is introduced native; its leaves thicken gradually to a gentle midvein ridge, and the rippled, and the heads from Europe; its leaves have a sharp, abrupt midvein heads produce all botanists. generally do not produce viable seed. The two are very similar and ridge not and separated are often by CONFUSING PLANTS: Only irises (p. 664) have similarly side-slotted leaves, but iris leaves have TO promi- nent keel and are not sweet-aromatic. The flowers and fruits are very different. HABITAT: Lakeshores, river edges, reservoirs, estuaries; in shallow, often slow- moving drainage waters that fluctuate in depth, where the bottom is shallow mud over gravel or sand. FOOD USE: Rhizomes can be collected all year; they are used medicinally or as a flavoring for candy or syrup. Their taste is extremely potent and they should be used in moderation. Tender hearts of leaf cluster bases can be eaten raw or cooked. Young spikes of immature flower buds are fragrant, tasty, and mucilaginous. Conservation 2/2/1. COMMENTS: Calamus candy, A. americanus leaf cross section. made from the rhizomes, was formerly sold commercially. This plant is found across the northern hemisphere and has long been appreciated for its fabulous aroma. Studies have shown a constituent of the rhizomes of the old-world species to be carcinogenic under lab conditions. The leaves, and the native North American species, are not known to contain the carcino- Young A. americanus plants genic compound. AKA sweet flag. A. calamus leaf cross section. A. americanus rhizome. Immature flower spike. 109 A. americanus peeled heart. 