AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS
6 Great bur-reed (continued)
COMMENTS: A surprisingly good and versatile food plant that is
largely ignored among the multitude of wetland vegetables.
RELATED EDIBLES: Other bur-reeds are similarly edible, but smaller.
Bur-reed base and peeled heart.
Bur-reed tuber and rhizome.
7
Calamus
2
3
IWE-73
genus Acorus + family Acoraceae
QUICK CHECK: Erect, sword-like, yellow-green leaves in a flattened bundle
sausage-like bronate ID difficulty flower cluster 1. projecting near the middle of the leaf-like stem; with highly a
DESCRIPTION: aromatic with Perennial forming colonies by rhizome, the above-ground
growth, 0.5-1" (13 a sweet 25 mm) odor thick, Rhizome white on older parts, pink to dark purple parts on very
the downward ery slot up the base scales may leat: with be or Rhizome the more 2 leaf sharp than remains. edges, aromatic is half each the Numerous but blade's blade erratically not sweet fitting width roots constricted, into are scented near a attached slot the like in base, wider the the on margin but the lop. than bottom Leaf deep, of the bundle half adjacent with only, many flattened leaf. oriented newer feath- The at
The area in
purple is inhab-
4 (30 120 (in) margin long and indented up to just 1" (2.5 above the spot where the slot decreases ends. Leaves in depth going
ited exclusively
by introduced
hairless and pink. and smooth with a gentle ridge down cm) wide, the erect to ascending, spongy, sword-like,
calamus.
208 Stems Hattened, with one sharp edge, the other middle edge and thicker a sharp with tip. a Hidden deep channel. flattened, parts A of single leaf bases spike are is borne white
AQUATICS WITH GRASS-LIKE LEAVES OR TUBULAR LEAFLESS STEMS 6 Great bur-reed (continued) COMMENTS: A surprisingly good and versatile food plant that is largely ignored among the multitude of wetland vegetables. RELATED EDIBLES: Other bur-reeds are similarly edible, but smaller. Bur-reed base and peeled heart. Bur-reed tuber and rhizome. 7 Calamus 2 3 IWE-73 genus Acorus + family Acoraceae QUICK CHECK: Erect, sword-like, yellow-green leaves in a flattened bundle sausage-like bronate ID difficulty flower cluster 1. projecting near the middle of the leaf-like stem; with highly a DESCRIPTION: aromatic with Perennial forming colonies by rhizome, the above-ground growth, 0.5-1" (13 a sweet 25 mm) odor thick, Rhizome white on older parts, pink to dark purple parts on very the downward ery slot up the base scales may leat: with be or Rhizome the more 2 leaf sharp than remains. edges, aromatic is half each the Numerous but blade's blade erratically not sweet fitting width roots constricted, into are scented near a attached slot the like in base, wider the the on margin but the lop. than bottom Leaf deep, of the bundle half adjacent with only, many flattened leaf. oriented newer feath- The at The area in purple is inhab- 4 (30 120 (in) margin long and indented up to just 1" (2.5 above the spot where the slot decreases ends. Leaves in depth going ited exclusively by introduced hairless and pink. and smooth with a gentle ridge down cm) wide, the erect to ascending, spongy, sword-like, calamus. 208 Stems Hattened, with one sharp edge, the other middle edge and thicker a sharp with tip. a Hidden deep channel. flattened, parts A of single leaf bases spike are is borne white 