0
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
1
American eelgrass
2
Vallisneria americana family Hydrocharitaceae
QUICK CHECK: Submerged, ribbon-like leaves with transfur edges and
center stripe; tubular fruits at the end of thin, coiled stems. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Despite the name this is not a grass. Submerged perennial, spreading
by thin rhizomes and often forming colonies. Leaves mostly in basal rosettes or clumps
of several, each clump associated with a tuft of fibrous roots-although this arrangement
may not be evident from the surface. Blades flat and ribbon-like, 5-10 mm wide, of rather
uniform width, thin and fragile, 2-7' (60-210 cm) long, sometimes reaching the surface.
They have a dull green stripe in the center and translucent edges. Margins are entire and
the tips rounded. Plants are male or female. Male stems are short and unlikely to be not ced.
(2.5-15 cm) from the base, and bear a cluster of tiny flowers enclosed in a spathe. Female stems
and leafless, about 2 mm in diameter, 2-10' (5-25 cm) long, reaching the surface, rounded, smooth
and coiled, inflating at the end. Flower single, tiny, terminal, white, with 3 petals and 3 sepais.
summer. Fruit (late summer) cylindric, 2-6" (5-15 cm) long and 4-6 mm wide, curving slighty. year
and smooth outside, the inside holding numerous elongated seeds embedded in a gelatinous mater.
HABITAT: Water of permanent lakes, ponds, sloughs, and slow-moving rivers, 1-8' (30-240 croud
ally with a mucky bottom. Native.
FOOD USE: The fruits, ripe or unripe, can be gathered from the water surface in late summer or
They are mild flavored and can be cooked as a vegetable. (I don't eat them raw lest they have paras"
larvae on the surface.) The mucilaginous texture makes them good in soup. Leaves are traditional ,
raw in East Asian cuisine, but I have not tried them. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This fascinating plant's tiny male flowers separate at maturity and float to the surface
they drift around like bachelors at a beach, hoping to meet a female. The coiled female stems retract
the mature fruit underwater. Eelgrass fruits are an important waterfowl food, especially for the canvascation American
Aythya vallisneria, which was named for the plant. It is said to give canvasback meat water-celery. a superb flavor.
eelgrass is widespread and very common, often fruiting in great abundance. AKA
111
0 AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR 1 American eelgrass 2 Vallisneria americana family Hydrocharitaceae QUICK CHECK: Submerged, ribbon-like leaves with transfur edges and center stripe; tubular fruits at the end of thin, coiled stems. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Despite the name this is not a grass. Submerged perennial, spreading by thin rhizomes and often forming colonies. Leaves mostly in basal rosettes or clumps of several, each clump associated with a tuft of fibrous roots-although this arrangement may not be evident from the surface. Blades flat and ribbon-like, 5-10 mm wide, of rather uniform width, thin and fragile, 2-7' (60-210 cm) long, sometimes reaching the surface. They have a dull green stripe in the center and translucent edges. Margins are entire and the tips rounded. Plants are male or female. Male stems are short and unlikely to be not ced. (2.5-15 cm) from the base, and bear a cluster of tiny flowers enclosed in a spathe. Female stems and leafless, about 2 mm in diameter, 2-10' (5-25 cm) long, reaching the surface, rounded, smooth and coiled, inflating at the end. Flower single, tiny, terminal, white, with 3 petals and 3 sepais. summer. Fruit (late summer) cylindric, 2-6" (5-15 cm) long and 4-6 mm wide, curving slighty. year and smooth outside, the inside holding numerous elongated seeds embedded in a gelatinous mater. HABITAT: Water of permanent lakes, ponds, sloughs, and slow-moving rivers, 1-8' (30-240 croud ally with a mucky bottom. Native. FOOD USE: The fruits, ripe or unripe, can be gathered from the water surface in late summer or They are mild flavored and can be cooked as a vegetable. (I don't eat them raw lest they have paras" larvae on the surface.) The mucilaginous texture makes them good in soup. Leaves are traditional , raw in East Asian cuisine, but I have not tried them. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This fascinating plant's tiny male flowers separate at maturity and float to the surface they drift around like bachelors at a beach, hoping to meet a female. The coiled female stems retract the mature fruit underwater. Eelgrass fruits are an important waterfowl food, especially for the canvascation American Aythya vallisneria, which was named for the plant. It is said to give canvasback meat water-celery. a superb flavor. eelgrass is widespread and very common, often fruiting in great abundance. AKA 111 