AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
3
Water parsnip
3
3
IWE-388
Sium suave Apiaciae (Carrot family)
QUICK scattered CHECK: umbels Pinnately compound leaf with long-lanceolate leaflets; a single, angled
stem; of small white flowers. ID difficulty 3+.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from clustered roots, the aerial parts with variable
based on season and water levels. Roots multiple, usually 12-30, in a radiating cluster, morphology white
inside and outside, with many depressions but no ring-like constrictions, 5-12" (13-30
long and 4-10 mm thick, limp and flexible but brittle, unbranched, widest near the middle,
tapering gently toward both ends. Occasional roots are shorter and widest near the tip. Rosettes have
leaves. Typical basal leaves pinnately once-compound, 6-12" (15-30 long with 15-21 leaflets. If the leaf 1-9
upright, the plane of the leaflets is perpendicular to the leaf, forming "ladder leaves" like those of parship Basal is
leaves may come up as spear-like shoots: long, straight, tapered, with unopened leaflets wrapped into n pointed
tip. Leaflets flat, sessile, neatly paired, lanceolate, 1.5-3.5" (4-9 cm) long, with needle-like tips. Occasional
leaflets are deeply lobed, especially near the base of the leaf. Margins have low, claw-tipped, forward-pointing
teeth. Midvein flat to raised above. Secondary veins numerous but not straight and none very prominent. on 35
to the midvein, roughly flat above, breaking into veinlets before reaching the margins. Veinlets terminate
mostly in teeth. Underwater leaves (and often the earliest spring leaves of terrestrial plants) have feathery
leaflets deeply pinnately cut into many thin, lacy divisions. Neither the leaflets nor the lacy divisions are statted
Petioles hollow, thin-walled, strongly tapered, not channeled, with one or a few purple-brown rings and aninterses -
septum below the first leaflets. After the first leaflets, the rachis is ridged on top. Stems usually single 15
(40-160 cm) tall and 0.4-1" (1-2.5 cm) thick, hollow, whitish inside, jointed, erect, hairless, green except
small amount of purple sometimes near the base. The surface is ridged with 7-9 angles which become sha.
toward the top; it also has fine, light green grooves. Portions of stems that develop underwater are thick-walls
and spongy with visible air channels and may 100
at the nodes. Internodes are 4-6" (10-15 long
(closer near the stem base). Branches few, only in
the upper 2/3, ascending, Stem leaves alternate.
once-compound with 3-13 leaflets (fewer toward
the top), on petioles usually less than half the
blade length, shorter toward the top. Upper leaves
are sessile or have the sheath extending to the first
leaflets. Petioles of stem leaves are sheathing,
broad, flat, and thin with a tiny, crescent-shaoed
hollow, fine grooves, and papery margins. After
the first leaflet the rachis abruptly narrows and
becomes rounded and hollow with a small groove
above that soon tapers away. Flooded plants delay
flowering. Inflorescence flat-topped compound
umbels 1.3-2" (3.3-5 cm) across, at branch each tips
and from upper leaf axils. Rays 13-19, ridged,
0.4-1,4" (1-3.5 cm) long (longer in fruit). umbellet, Beneath
first umbel division, as well as each entire
the whorl of 3-11 linear to lanceolate bracts, reflexed
is a thin whitish margins, 3-12 mm long. minute
with the peduncle or ray. There are only
against on and around these bracts. Umbellets Howers
occasionally them are often touching, on white petals
hairs touch each other. but pedicels the 3-5
within Flowers 3 mm across, 5 broadly
min long. tips folded in. Fruit 2-3 mm long prominent
with the flattened, hairless, with 3 edge
oval, slightly each broad side and one on sometimes each
ridges total on of 8). In fruit the umbels are giving them a
(for a with a powdery mildew, page.)
covered hoary look. (Continued on the next
213
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR 3 Water parsnip 3 3 IWE-388 Sium suave Apiaciae (Carrot family) QUICK scattered CHECK: umbels Pinnately compound leaf with long-lanceolate leaflets; a single, angled stem; of small white flowers. ID difficulty 3+. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from clustered roots, the aerial parts with variable based on season and water levels. Roots multiple, usually 12-30, in a radiating cluster, morphology white inside and outside, with many depressions but no ring-like constrictions, 5-12" (13-30 long and 4-10 mm thick, limp and flexible but brittle, unbranched, widest near the middle, tapering gently toward both ends. Occasional roots are shorter and widest near the tip. Rosettes have leaves. Typical basal leaves pinnately once-compound, 6-12" (15-30 long with 15-21 leaflets. If the leaf 1-9 upright, the plane of the leaflets is perpendicular to the leaf, forming "ladder leaves" like those of parship Basal is leaves may come up as spear-like shoots: long, straight, tapered, with unopened leaflets wrapped into n pointed tip. Leaflets flat, sessile, neatly paired, lanceolate, 1.5-3.5" (4-9 cm) long, with needle-like tips. Occasional leaflets are deeply lobed, especially near the base of the leaf. Margins have low, claw-tipped, forward-pointing teeth. Midvein flat to raised above. Secondary veins numerous but not straight and none very prominent. on 35 to the midvein, roughly flat above, breaking into veinlets before reaching the margins. Veinlets terminate mostly in teeth. Underwater leaves (and often the earliest spring leaves of terrestrial plants) have feathery leaflets deeply pinnately cut into many thin, lacy divisions. Neither the leaflets nor the lacy divisions are statted Petioles hollow, thin-walled, strongly tapered, not channeled, with one or a few purple-brown rings and aninterses - septum below the first leaflets. After the first leaflets, the rachis is ridged on top. Stems usually single 15 (40-160 cm) tall and 0.4-1" (1-2.5 cm) thick, hollow, whitish inside, jointed, erect, hairless, green except small amount of purple sometimes near the base. The surface is ridged with 7-9 angles which become sha. toward the top; it also has fine, light green grooves. Portions of stems that develop underwater are thick-walls and spongy with visible air channels and may 100 at the nodes. Internodes are 4-6" (10-15 long (closer near the stem base). Branches few, only in the upper 2/3, ascending, Stem leaves alternate. once-compound with 3-13 leaflets (fewer toward the top), on petioles usually less than half the blade length, shorter toward the top. Upper leaves are sessile or have the sheath extending to the first leaflets. Petioles of stem leaves are sheathing, broad, flat, and thin with a tiny, crescent-shaoed hollow, fine grooves, and papery margins. After the first leaflet the rachis abruptly narrows and becomes rounded and hollow with a small groove above that soon tapers away. Flooded plants delay flowering. Inflorescence flat-topped compound umbels 1.3-2" (3.3-5 cm) across, at branch each tips and from upper leaf axils. Rays 13-19, ridged, 0.4-1,4" (1-3.5 cm) long (longer in fruit). umbellet, Beneath first umbel division, as well as each entire the whorl of 3-11 linear to lanceolate bracts, reflexed is a thin whitish margins, 3-12 mm long. minute with the peduncle or ray. There are only against on and around these bracts. Umbellets Howers occasionally them are often touching, on white petals hairs touch each other. but pedicels the 3-5 within Flowers 3 mm across, 5 broadly min long. tips folded in. Fruit 2-3 mm long prominent with the flattened, hairless, with 3 edge oval, slightly each broad side and one on sometimes each ridges total on of 8). In fruit the umbels are giving them a (for a with a powdery mildew, page.) covered hoary look. (Continued on the next 213 