AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
2
Watercress Nasturtium officinale 3 IWE-381 Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
QUICK CHECK: Per unbent bein of spring water with pinnately divided leaves, rooting
from the weak trailing or creeping stems that often float thread-like, and form
stems ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial with stand erect up to 18" (46 cm) in summer. Thin, to height,
dense thick mats. in The clumps tips from underwater nodes. Stems thick in proportion Branches
white roots grow prominent on underwater sections.
hollow. hairless. and ridged; ridges alternate more (not in a basal rosette), to 6" (15 cm) long, hairless, flowering pinnately or fruit-
occasional from leaf axils. to Leaves lanceolate, thin leaflets (the leaflets more lanceolate on lack erect teeth but may have
divided with Leaflets 3:9 rounded well-spaced (the gap often more than the leaflet width) and narrow winged ridges.
ing plants) on the margins. Petioles shallowly channeled, the edges with blooming in a
occasional indentations to 10" (25 cm) long. Flowers 4-6 mm across with 4 white petals, curved upward,
Inflorescence a raceme cluster up at the tip of the raceme. Pods long, thin, claw-like, tubular, slightly but
tight. on well-spaced flat-topped pedicels about 12 mm long. In winter, watercress dies back to the underwater portion,
has no perennating storage organ.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Pennsylvania cress (p. 431) has leaves in a basal rosette.
HABITAT: Springs and spring-fed streams high in calcium. Tolerates shade but thrives in full sun. Often grows
without any connection to soil. Introduced. I
FOOD USE: Gather greens from late winter through late fall (but especially spring) and use raw in salads or
on sandwiches. They can also be fried or used in soup or casserole.
COMMENTS: This is another wild vegetable that is identical to the cultivated form sold at high prices in
grocery stores. Watercress has a strong pungency that can be overpowering when used in too great a quan-
tity, but wonderful when used appropriately. The
spicy flavor is greatly reduced by cooking. There
are actually two very similar species of watercress.
N officinale is the larger and more common of the
two, the smaller species is one-row watercress N.
microphyllurn, so named because the seeds in the
pos are found in a single row as opposed to the
two of common watercress. Both are used similarly.
CAUTION: Watercress may have larvae of parasitic
flukes on its surface. This is most likely
regions and in areas where livestock are
infection, cook all watercress
and never eat underwater por-
24
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR 2 Watercress Nasturtium officinale 3 IWE-381 Brassicaceae (Mustard family) QUICK CHECK: Per unbent bein of spring water with pinnately divided leaves, rooting from the weak trailing or creeping stems that often float thread-like, and form stems ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial with stand erect up to 18" (46 cm) in summer. Thin, to height, dense thick mats. in The clumps tips from underwater nodes. Stems thick in proportion Branches white roots grow prominent on underwater sections. hollow. hairless. and ridged; ridges alternate more (not in a basal rosette), to 6" (15 cm) long, hairless, flowering pinnately or fruit- occasional from leaf axils. to Leaves lanceolate, thin leaflets (the leaflets more lanceolate on lack erect teeth but may have divided with Leaflets 3:9 rounded well-spaced (the gap often more than the leaflet width) and narrow winged ridges. ing plants) on the margins. Petioles shallowly channeled, the edges with blooming in a occasional indentations to 10" (25 cm) long. Flowers 4-6 mm across with 4 white petals, curved upward, Inflorescence a raceme cluster up at the tip of the raceme. Pods long, thin, claw-like, tubular, slightly but tight. on well-spaced flat-topped pedicels about 12 mm long. In winter, watercress dies back to the underwater portion, has no perennating storage organ. CONFUSING PLANTS: Pennsylvania cress (p. 431) has leaves in a basal rosette. HABITAT: Springs and spring-fed streams high in calcium. Tolerates shade but thrives in full sun. Often grows without any connection to soil. Introduced. I FOOD USE: Gather greens from late winter through late fall (but especially spring) and use raw in salads or on sandwiches. They can also be fried or used in soup or casserole. COMMENTS: This is another wild vegetable that is identical to the cultivated form sold at high prices in grocery stores. Watercress has a strong pungency that can be overpowering when used in too great a quan- tity, but wonderful when used appropriately. The spicy flavor is greatly reduced by cooking. There are actually two very similar species of watercress. N officinale is the larger and more common of the two, the smaller species is one-row watercress N. microphyllurn, so named because the seeds in the pos are found in a single row as opposed to the two of common watercress. Both are used similarly. CAUTION: Watercress may have larvae of parasitic flukes on its surface. This is most likely regions and in areas where livestock are infection, cook all watercress and never eat underwater por- 24 