AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
3
Water parsnip (continued)
Misidentific ations with water hemlock (pp. 668-670) have resulted in angled. death! Water Water
CONFUSING PLANTS: times compound, splitting 3 ways at the first division. The stems are not the middle, stiff,
hemlock leaves are 1-5" 2-3 (2.5-13 cm) long and much stouter (about 20% as thick as long), widest in has multiple
hemlock roots straw-colored are outside, often with yellow lines inside. Bulblet water hemlock (p. 670) the first division,
thin yellowish roots or that taper from the top. The leaves are 2-3 times compound, splitting 3 ways at When
with the leaflets very thin and lobed, the smallest divisions linear. The stems are not angled. mature,
the bulblets in the leaf axils are diagnostic. Oxypolis rigidior (p. 424) is similar to water parsnip in form, but the
leaflets are entire or with a few scattered, large teeth toward the end of the leaflet. Its roots are clustered and
white with spherical enlargements toward the end. Berula erecta (see next) is another member of the carrot
family that also goes by the common name "water parsnip." This is a smaller plant; its leaves are shorter and
broader than those of Sium suave, and coarsely toothed. The upper leaves have large teeth or deeply cut lobes.
HABITAT: Marshes, lakeshores, ditches, ponds, hardwood swamps, river oxbows. Especially likes rich muck
and thrives with water level fluctuations. Native.
FOOD USE: Exercise extreme care in identifying this plant. The roots can be collected from fall through
spring and eaten raw or cooked. Dig up plants gingerly so that roots don't snap. Break off the larger roots
and replant the crown. Young stems, leaves, and leaf shoots can be eaten raw or cooked in spring and early
summer. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: Due to the danger of misidentification, this vegetable is rarely used or written about. One of
the few documented deaths from plant misidentification that I have been able to find resulted from mistaking
western water hemlock for water parsnip. However, water parsnip's roots are a highly esteemed food in many
Native American cultures. Skirret (Sium sisarum), a closely related plant with nearly identical flavor, has been
cultivated as a root and stem vegetable in Asia for thousands of years. It is still available from some seed
catalogs in the US.
Typic al leaflet close up.
(middle) Young basal
leaves and leaf shoots
emerging in summer
after flood recession.
(right) Water parship
stems are strongly
angied or ridged
unlike those of Waler
hemlock
214
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR 3 Water parsnip (continued) Misidentific ations with water hemlock (pp. 668-670) have resulted in angled. death! Water Water CONFUSING PLANTS: times compound, splitting 3 ways at the first division. The stems are not the middle, stiff, hemlock leaves are 1-5" 2-3 (2.5-13 cm) long and much stouter (about 20% as thick as long), widest in has multiple hemlock roots straw-colored are outside, often with yellow lines inside. Bulblet water hemlock (p. 670) the first division, thin yellowish roots or that taper from the top. The leaves are 2-3 times compound, splitting 3 ways at When with the leaflets very thin and lobed, the smallest divisions linear. The stems are not angled. mature, the bulblets in the leaf axils are diagnostic. Oxypolis rigidior (p. 424) is similar to water parsnip in form, but the leaflets are entire or with a few scattered, large teeth toward the end of the leaflet. Its roots are clustered and white with spherical enlargements toward the end. Berula erecta (see next) is another member of the carrot family that also goes by the common name "water parsnip." This is a smaller plant; its leaves are shorter and broader than those of Sium suave, and coarsely toothed. The upper leaves have large teeth or deeply cut lobes. HABITAT: Marshes, lakeshores, ditches, ponds, hardwood swamps, river oxbows. Especially likes rich muck and thrives with water level fluctuations. Native. FOOD USE: Exercise extreme care in identifying this plant. The roots can be collected from fall through spring and eaten raw or cooked. Dig up plants gingerly so that roots don't snap. Break off the larger roots and replant the crown. Young stems, leaves, and leaf shoots can be eaten raw or cooked in spring and early summer. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: Due to the danger of misidentification, this vegetable is rarely used or written about. One of the few documented deaths from plant misidentification that I have been able to find resulted from mistaking western water hemlock for water parsnip. However, water parsnip's roots are a highly esteemed food in many Native American cultures. Skirret (Sium sisarum), a closely related plant with nearly identical flavor, has been cultivated as a root and stem vegetable in Asia for thousands of years. It is still available from some seed catalogs in the US. Typic al leaflet close up. (middle) Young basal leaves and leaf shoots emerging in summer after flood recession. (right) Water parship stems are strongly angied or ridged unlike those of Waler hemlock 214 