AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
4
Berula erecta Apiaciae (Carrot family)
Springwater parsnip
3
Mat-forming plant of springwater with pinnately difficulty compound 3+, leaves, the
leaflets QUICK CHECK: with large feeth, small umbels of tiny white flowers. ID
forming dense mats like watercress, spreading thread-like by creeping white
DESCRIPTION: Perennial storage organ; these are round with whorls of leaflets,
roots at the nodes. the terminal leaflet occasionally conjoined
horizontal stems with Basal no leaves in a rosette, pinnately once-compound with 14-21 to those
the lowest leaflets much reduced, tend to be smaller and often form dense mats on the bottom sometimes of spring strongly pools.
adjacent. Submerged rosettes attached to the top of the rachis rather than the sides, teeth. Midvein and
Leaflets all sessile, slightly clasping, thin, ovate, to 2" <5 cm) long, shallowly lobed or with large, blunt viewed from the
out of plane, veins hairless, are faint very and not depressed. Petiole/rachis leafy for half or more of its with length; a small channel on
secondary scalloped or wavy, rising at each node. Petioles are hollow, finely ridged Aerial stems weak,
side it appears with fine stripes, smooth, hairless, ringed only where leaflets attach. They are
top, 28" brittle, cm) green long and 0.6" (15 mm) thick. sometimes erect but more often leaning or decumbent. near
to hollow, (70 juicy, often sinuous, hairless, jointed, roundish in cross section with fine lines and faint ridges alternate
the base but the upper part is distinctly angled. Branches are spreading or ascending. Stem leaves
with a small sheath near the base, pinnately compound with 7-11 leaflets. Uppermost leaves are reduced to a
few widely spaced leaflets, narrower and deeply cut with large teeth or small lobes. Inflorescence a compound
umbel (occasionally thrice compound) 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) across, with a whorl of several entire, linear bracts to
12 mm at the base of the great umbel; there are bracts beneath each umbellet about as long as the rays.
Umbellets 8-12 mm across, mostly not touching each other; the flowers within them do not touch either.
Flowers tiny and white with 5 petals curved in at the tip. Fruit tiny, oval, slightly flattened, seldom maturing.
216
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR 4 Berula erecta Apiaciae (Carrot family) Springwater parsnip 3 Mat-forming plant of springwater with pinnately difficulty compound 3+, leaves, the leaflets QUICK CHECK: with large feeth, small umbels of tiny white flowers. ID forming dense mats like watercress, spreading thread-like by creeping white DESCRIPTION: Perennial storage organ; these are round with whorls of leaflets, roots at the nodes. the terminal leaflet occasionally conjoined horizontal stems with Basal no leaves in a rosette, pinnately once-compound with 14-21 to those the lowest leaflets much reduced, tend to be smaller and often form dense mats on the bottom sometimes of spring strongly pools. adjacent. Submerged rosettes attached to the top of the rachis rather than the sides, teeth. Midvein and Leaflets all sessile, slightly clasping, thin, ovate, to 2" <5 cm) long, shallowly lobed or with large, blunt viewed from the out of plane, veins hairless, are faint very and not depressed. Petiole/rachis leafy for half or more of its with length; a small channel on secondary scalloped or wavy, rising at each node. Petioles are hollow, finely ridged Aerial stems weak, side it appears with fine stripes, smooth, hairless, ringed only where leaflets attach. They are top, 28" brittle, cm) green long and 0.6" (15 mm) thick. sometimes erect but more often leaning or decumbent. near to hollow, (70 juicy, often sinuous, hairless, jointed, roundish in cross section with fine lines and faint ridges alternate the base but the upper part is distinctly angled. Branches are spreading or ascending. Stem leaves with a small sheath near the base, pinnately compound with 7-11 leaflets. Uppermost leaves are reduced to a few widely spaced leaflets, narrower and deeply cut with large teeth or small lobes. Inflorescence a compound umbel (occasionally thrice compound) 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) across, with a whorl of several entire, linear bracts to 12 mm at the base of the great umbel; there are bracts beneath each umbellet about as long as the rays. Umbellets 8-12 mm across, mostly not touching each other; the flowers within them do not touch either. Flowers tiny and white with 5 petals curved in at the tip. Fruit tiny, oval, slightly flattened, seldom maturing. 216 