AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
CONFUSING (Sium suave, see PLANTS: previous), Often but Berula confused with the larger, more Apart relative that alsor
of prostrate stems. Javan erecto is much smaller, lesserent, mal forming. 13 and alled water
water hemlocks (deadly poisonous, water celery p. has 668). twice compound leaves with depressed yeins. roots Also from compare 11th
HABITAT: Open to shaded spring water in pools, marshes, streamsides, and fens, in alkaline soil Native
This plant is being widely displaced and outcompeted by non native watercress.
FOOD USE: The tender greens (early spring to autumn) are good raw or cooked. They have a strong
parsley-parsnip flavor, much like Sium suave, and are used in salads, soups, casseroles, etc. Conservation celery 2.
COMMENTS: This little-known edible (which, like many edible members of the carrot family, is often errons
ously reported as toxic) is remarkably widespread-it is found in Asia, Europe, Africa, Australia. and Norin
America. Its ecology is much like that of watercress, which crowds it out and is the greatest threat to ,
survival. Despite the name, there is not an edible root-springwater parsnip has no taproot at all AKA 114°F
parsnip, small water parsnip, water celery, Berula pusilla. See liver fluke caution p. 24.
Rosettes
are often
permanently
under water
Springwater
parsnip
floating
rosettes
growing
beside
watercress
11]
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR CONFUSING (Sium suave, see PLANTS: previous), Often but Berula confused with the larger, more Apart relative that alsor of prostrate stems. Javan erecto is much smaller, lesserent, mal forming. 13 and alled water water hemlocks (deadly poisonous, water celery p. has 668). twice compound leaves with depressed yeins. roots Also from compare 11th HABITAT: Open to shaded spring water in pools, marshes, streamsides, and fens, in alkaline soil Native This plant is being widely displaced and outcompeted by non native watercress. FOOD USE: The tender greens (early spring to autumn) are good raw or cooked. They have a strong parsley-parsnip flavor, much like Sium suave, and are used in salads, soups, casseroles, etc. Conservation celery 2. COMMENTS: This little-known edible (which, like many edible members of the carrot family, is often errons ously reported as toxic) is remarkably widespread-it is found in Asia, Europe, Africa, Australia. and Norin America. Its ecology is much like that of watercress, which crowds it out and is the greatest threat to , survival. Despite the name, there is not an edible root-springwater parsnip has no taproot at all AKA 114°F parsnip, small water parsnip, water celery, Berula pusilla. See liver fluke caution p. 24. Rosettes are often permanently under water Springwater parsnip floating rosettes growing beside watercress 11] 