mm
1cm
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
6
Alligator weed
2
Alternanthera philoxeroides
family
Amaranthaceae
UICK CHECK: Mat-forming plant with thin hollow stems and
sessile leaves; flowers in spiky whitish balls. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: sometimes Mat-forming perennial that may be rooted in mud or floating
grows well away from the water. Stems creep laterally, rooting at the it
then turning weakly erect to 16" (40 cm) high and 10-14 mm thick, tapering little nodes
are smooth, light green distally but often reddish near the lower nodes, sporigy walled. They
hollow, hairless except at the nodes, and slightly squared. There are 2 shallow
opposite each sides, along which there is sometimes a faint line of fine hairs. The lower grooves stem 13 destine
above node, but there is little to no bulge at the upper nodes. At each node there 15 a collar around: The hulged
which in aerial parts is fringed with fine hairs. Branches infrequent but major. Leaves paired. ellipic in
or oblanceolate, 1.25-4" (3.2-10 cm) long, thick and rather succulent, tapered to the base. the Non
on lower leaves, blunt-pointed on upper. Blades are flat and hairless or have scattered appres sed
both sides that point toward the tip. Margins entire or with a few scattered, tiny teeth: bristly on
Midvein light in color, protruding above and below. Secondary veins several, 60-90' to the mid 1911
and protruding slightly below. Petioles to 100% of blade length in aquatic parts; leaves in aerial SHIP
sile. Inflorescence a tight ball-like white cluster 1 cm wide, borne at the end of a straight, faint! /
2-4" (5-10 cm) long, terminal or from leaf axils. Flowers
through fall) dry and chaffy with 5 stiff-pointed. ovare
scarcely spread open; they are 50 jammed together than
are hard to count. The small fruits are dry and bladder
HABITAT: Ponds, ditches, marshes, canals, lake edges
ground nearby. Does best in full sun but tolerates some
Introduced. I
FOOD USE: Young leaves and stem tips can be gathered through
the growing season, but are best in spring and early summer They
are mild in flavor and can be eaten raw but are much better cocked
COMMENTS: This amaranth relative is extremely abundant ill some
waterways of the South and is rapidly spreading. Indeed, alligators
often lurk in clumps of it.
119
Small leaves on winter growth
mm 1cm AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR 6 Alligator weed 2 Alternanthera philoxeroides family Amaranthaceae UICK CHECK: Mat-forming plant with thin hollow stems and sessile leaves; flowers in spiky whitish balls. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: sometimes Mat-forming perennial that may be rooted in mud or floating grows well away from the water. Stems creep laterally, rooting at the it then turning weakly erect to 16" (40 cm) high and 10-14 mm thick, tapering little nodes are smooth, light green distally but often reddish near the lower nodes, sporigy walled. They hollow, hairless except at the nodes, and slightly squared. There are 2 shallow opposite each sides, along which there is sometimes a faint line of fine hairs. The lower grooves stem 13 destine above node, but there is little to no bulge at the upper nodes. At each node there 15 a collar around: The hulged which in aerial parts is fringed with fine hairs. Branches infrequent but major. Leaves paired. ellipic in or oblanceolate, 1.25-4" (3.2-10 cm) long, thick and rather succulent, tapered to the base. the Non on lower leaves, blunt-pointed on upper. Blades are flat and hairless or have scattered appres sed both sides that point toward the tip. Margins entire or with a few scattered, tiny teeth: bristly on Midvein light in color, protruding above and below. Secondary veins several, 60-90' to the mid 1911 and protruding slightly below. Petioles to 100% of blade length in aquatic parts; leaves in aerial SHIP sile. Inflorescence a tight ball-like white cluster 1 cm wide, borne at the end of a straight, faint! / 2-4" (5-10 cm) long, terminal or from leaf axils. Flowers through fall) dry and chaffy with 5 stiff-pointed. ovare scarcely spread open; they are 50 jammed together than are hard to count. The small fruits are dry and bladder HABITAT: Ponds, ditches, marshes, canals, lake edges ground nearby. Does best in full sun but tolerates some Introduced. I FOOD USE: Young leaves and stem tips can be gathered through the growing season, but are best in spring and early summer They are mild in flavor and can be eaten raw but are much better cocked COMMENTS: This amaranth relative is extremely abundant ill some waterways of the South and is rapidly spreading. Indeed, alligators often lurk in clumps of it. 119 Small leaves on winter growth 