5
Brooklime Veronica americana 1 + family Scrophulariaceae
QUICK CHECK: In spring water; fleshy stems and thick, paired, shallowly-toothed
leaves. growing in water, sometimes with underwater decumbent, leaves, or
ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial 6-30" herb (15-75 cm) tall. Stems leaning, trailing, succulent, up
often in dense colonies, reddish (especially at nodes), round, hollow, angles of 45-60°.
erect; smooth, hairless, thick, rooting often at lower nodes, branching infrequently at the underside
Composite
to 0.9" (23 mm) hairless, thick, succulent, brittle, ovate, folded or cupped; hardly evident.
range of native
Leaves paired, dark dots. Major veins faintly depressed above, but veinlets are shallowly
and introduced
has tiny, have small, widely-spaced, blunt teeth. Petioles short, broad, winged, be clasping.
populations.
channeled, about racemes 5% of blade (8-10 cm) long with 12-50 flowers, from leaf axils on peduncles on much thin thinner pedicels than
Margins length; upper leaves on flowering plants may
Inflorescence held at about 3-4" the same angle as the branches, the flowers not touching, very with 4 sepals
the main stem, each with a lanceolate bract at the base. Flowers (late spring to fall) 5-6 mm across capsule that
13 and mm 4 petals, long, the latter purple with darker purple streaks, a few blooming at once. Fruit underneath. a 2-part
retains its protruding pistil and the 4-part calyx
CONFUSING PLANTS: A close relative, water speedwell V. anagallis
arvensis also grows in water, but it has thinner leaves that are more
lanceolate, and the upper ones are sessile with clasping bases. This
plant is marginally edible, so there is no danger.
HABITAT: Springs, fens, small brooks and their edges, in full to partial
sunlight-often growing right in the water like watercress. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather the tender growing tips from spring through early
fall. (For raw use, pick only the portion well above the water to eliminate
the risk of liver flukes.) Best raw in salads or sandwiches. Conservation 2.
WARNING: See liver fluke caution (p. 24) before eating any aquatic
plant raw.
COMMENTS: Populations of this plant are scattered due to its habitat
requirements, but it can be locally prolific. In many areas it has been
outcompeted and displaced by watercress. Although the greens are
tender, they are rather bitter and astringent and are best used spar-
ingly. Based upon taxonomic technicalities this plant's family name
has been changed to Plantaginaceae in newer sources. There has long
been debate over whether this species should be separated from the
very similar Old-World V. beccabunga.
218
5 Brooklime Veronica americana 1 + family Scrophulariaceae QUICK CHECK: In spring water; fleshy stems and thick, paired, shallowly-toothed leaves. growing in water, sometimes with underwater decumbent, leaves, or ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial 6-30" herb (15-75 cm) tall. Stems leaning, trailing, succulent, up often in dense colonies, reddish (especially at nodes), round, hollow, angles of 45-60°. erect; smooth, hairless, thick, rooting often at lower nodes, branching infrequently at the underside Composite to 0.9" (23 mm) hairless, thick, succulent, brittle, ovate, folded or cupped; hardly evident. range of native Leaves paired, dark dots. Major veins faintly depressed above, but veinlets are shallowly and introduced has tiny, have small, widely-spaced, blunt teeth. Petioles short, broad, winged, be clasping. populations. channeled, about racemes 5% of blade (8-10 cm) long with 12-50 flowers, from leaf axils on peduncles on much thin thinner pedicels than Margins length; upper leaves on flowering plants may Inflorescence held at about 3-4" the same angle as the branches, the flowers not touching, very with 4 sepals the main stem, each with a lanceolate bract at the base. Flowers (late spring to fall) 5-6 mm across capsule that 13 and mm 4 petals, long, the latter purple with darker purple streaks, a few blooming at once. Fruit underneath. a 2-part retains its protruding pistil and the 4-part calyx CONFUSING PLANTS: A close relative, water speedwell V. anagallis arvensis also grows in water, but it has thinner leaves that are more lanceolate, and the upper ones are sessile with clasping bases. This plant is marginally edible, so there is no danger. HABITAT: Springs, fens, small brooks and their edges, in full to partial sunlight-often growing right in the water like watercress. Native. FOOD USE: Gather the tender growing tips from spring through early fall. (For raw use, pick only the portion well above the water to eliminate the risk of liver flukes.) Best raw in salads or sandwiches. Conservation 2. WARNING: See liver fluke caution (p. 24) before eating any aquatic plant raw. COMMENTS: Populations of this plant are scattered due to its habitat requirements, but it can be locally prolific. In many areas it has been outcompeted and displaced by watercress. Although the greens are tender, they are rather bitter and astringent and are best used spar- ingly. Based upon taxonomic technicalities this plant's family name has been changed to Plantaginaceae in newer sources. There has long been debate over whether this species should be separated from the very similar Old-World V. beccabunga. 218 