AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
8 Water pennywort
Hydrocotyle umbellata
Araliaceae (Ginseng family)
QUICK and umbels CHECK: of Dense colonies of small, round, shiny, peltate leaves with rounded teath
tiny white flowers; growing in shallow water. ID difficulty 1,
DESCRIPTION: of Emergent aquatic perennial to 9" (23 cm) tall, forming dome-like
overlapping leaves in full sun. Spreads by rhizome; these are about 3 mm thick, clumps
smooth, and produce a cluster of thread-like roots at each node, where a single whitish.
attached. Petioles erect, straight, round, with no channels or grooves of any kind, petiole is
and hairless, spongy inside, light green, to 9" (23 cm) long, Blades peltate (the smooth petiole
connected to the center), at a right angle to the petiole, nearly rounded but usually slightly wider than
1.2-2.1" (3-5 cm) wide, thick and fleshy, glossy and hairless on both sides. Margins have broad, shallow. long
lobes, each with a few small notches. Light veins radiate from the leaf center and run almost straight rounded in ire
margins; they are depressed scarcely if at all above and do not protrude below. Inflorescence a simple imbel
about 0.8" (2 cm) across with short, straight pedicels containing 3-6 dozen crowded flowers, atop a finaight.
erect scape that is slightly shorter and proportionately thinner than the petioles, often red-tinted. smooth
and hairless. Flowers tiny, the corolla with 5 pointed, ovate, white petals, each with a prominent central
Fruit flattened, kidney-shaped, wider than long.
HABITAT: Shallow permanent waterways with relatively stable water levels, in full to partial sur.
FOOD USE: Tender leaves and stems can be eaten raw or cooked throughout the growing seasor is . -
most prevalent in early summer. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: The leaves are slightly aromatic with a pleasant flavor that is mildly bitter. The pet
scapes taste milder than the leaves. This green is remarkable for its very long season of availability
ginseng family is closely related to the carrot family and is sometimes classed with it.
RELATED EDIBLES: The members of this genus are generally edible, and there are several others in our
area (p. 288, 620).
Water pennywort spreading by physomes
221
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR 8 Water pennywort Hydrocotyle umbellata Araliaceae (Ginseng family) QUICK and umbels CHECK: of Dense colonies of small, round, shiny, peltate leaves with rounded teath tiny white flowers; growing in shallow water. ID difficulty 1, DESCRIPTION: of Emergent aquatic perennial to 9" (23 cm) tall, forming dome-like overlapping leaves in full sun. Spreads by rhizome; these are about 3 mm thick, clumps smooth, and produce a cluster of thread-like roots at each node, where a single whitish. attached. Petioles erect, straight, round, with no channels or grooves of any kind, petiole is and hairless, spongy inside, light green, to 9" (23 cm) long, Blades peltate (the smooth petiole connected to the center), at a right angle to the petiole, nearly rounded but usually slightly wider than 1.2-2.1" (3-5 cm) wide, thick and fleshy, glossy and hairless on both sides. Margins have broad, shallow. long lobes, each with a few small notches. Light veins radiate from the leaf center and run almost straight rounded in ire margins; they are depressed scarcely if at all above and do not protrude below. Inflorescence a simple imbel about 0.8" (2 cm) across with short, straight pedicels containing 3-6 dozen crowded flowers, atop a finaight. erect scape that is slightly shorter and proportionately thinner than the petioles, often red-tinted. smooth and hairless. Flowers tiny, the corolla with 5 pointed, ovate, white petals, each with a prominent central Fruit flattened, kidney-shaped, wider than long. HABITAT: Shallow permanent waterways with relatively stable water levels, in full to partial sur. FOOD USE: Tender leaves and stems can be eaten raw or cooked throughout the growing seasor is . - most prevalent in early summer. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: The leaves are slightly aromatic with a pleasant flavor that is mildly bitter. The pet scapes taste milder than the leaves. This green is remarkable for its very long season of availability ginseng family is closely related to the carrot family and is sometimes classed with it. RELATED EDIBLES: The members of this genus are generally edible, and there are several others in our area (p. 288, 620). Water pennywort spreading by physomes 221 