AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
7 Water-chestnut 3
Trapa natans + Lythraceae (Loosestrife family)
Floating rosettes of small, diamond shaped, difficulty sharply 1. toothed leaves;
rope-like large mats over water. Stems fully submerged. thick. with
QUICK CHECK; underwater stem: nuts with 4 sharp points. ID
DESCRIPTION: Aquatic mostly unbranched, annual forming tapering. thinner toward one the side. base, Underwater 3-10 mm leaves
Range
nodes every 2-4" (5-10 and finely dissected. At the surface the cm) wide, broader
long and rope-like. cm), each node with a raised scar on stem enlarges and forms
expanding.
a in crowded an offset rosette. pair, feathery Surface leaves diamond or the fan veins shaped. below. 1-2" Veins (2.5-5 scarcely depressed above, the the tip they midvein are
hardly evident, bristle-tipped teeth. Petioles thick round hairy borne (especially singly on thick pedicels
than long, glossy, but flat, all hairless veins protrude above, below. hairy on Margins not toothed near the base. but toward below) 1-6 times
the blade length, have 4 obovate, veiny white petals with wavy edges Fruit odd-shaped. starchy kernel
serrated with broad, with regular, an inflated floot in the outer half Flowers 4-7 mm across 1-1.5" (2.5-4 cm)
wide, among dark the brown, leaves; with they 4 large, very sharp spikes. enclosing a single white fleshed asymmetric
of uniform texture.
HABITAT: Slow-moving water
up to 10 feet (3 m) deep, in full to
partial sun. Introduced. I
FOOD USE: Flip rosettes in late
summer and pick the larger nuts
from beneath-one or a few may
be ripe at a time. Nuts can be dried
whole and then cracked with a
hammer, or cut in half before
drying. Kernels can be steamed
fried, boiled in soups, or ground
into flour.
COMMENTS: An excellent edible
locally available in huge quanti-
ties. Beware of the sharp spines
while harvesting-nuts may sink
to the bottom and get stepped on.
The rosettes can have shockingly
attractive symmetry. This plant is
extremely invasive: do not put the nuts anywhere they might be able to grow. In some areas the seeds are
illegal to transport. But if you eat them, ! won't tell on you. AKA water caltrop, bull nut, bat nut.
220
Nuts attached on the rosette underside
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR 7 Water-chestnut 3 Trapa natans + Lythraceae (Loosestrife family) Floating rosettes of small, diamond shaped, difficulty sharply 1. toothed leaves; rope-like large mats over water. Stems fully submerged. thick. with QUICK CHECK; underwater stem: nuts with 4 sharp points. ID DESCRIPTION: Aquatic mostly unbranched, annual forming tapering. thinner toward one the side. base, Underwater 3-10 mm leaves Range nodes every 2-4" (5-10 and finely dissected. At the surface the cm) wide, broader long and rope-like. cm), each node with a raised scar on stem enlarges and forms expanding. a in crowded an offset rosette. pair, feathery Surface leaves diamond or the fan veins shaped. below. 1-2" Veins (2.5-5 scarcely depressed above, the the tip they midvein are hardly evident, bristle-tipped teeth. Petioles thick round hairy borne (especially singly on thick pedicels than long, glossy, but flat, all hairless veins protrude above, below. hairy on Margins not toothed near the base. but toward below) 1-6 times the blade length, have 4 obovate, veiny white petals with wavy edges Fruit odd-shaped. starchy kernel serrated with broad, with regular, an inflated floot in the outer half Flowers 4-7 mm across 1-1.5" (2.5-4 cm) wide, among dark the brown, leaves; with they 4 large, very sharp spikes. enclosing a single white fleshed asymmetric of uniform texture. HABITAT: Slow-moving water up to 10 feet (3 m) deep, in full to partial sun. Introduced. I FOOD USE: Flip rosettes in late summer and pick the larger nuts from beneath-one or a few may be ripe at a time. Nuts can be dried whole and then cracked with a hammer, or cut in half before drying. Kernels can be steamed fried, boiled in soups, or ground into flour. COMMENTS: An excellent edible locally available in huge quanti- ties. Beware of the sharp spines while harvesting-nuts may sink to the bottom and get stepped on. The rosettes can have shockingly attractive symmetry. This plant is extremely invasive: do not put the nuts anywhere they might be able to grow. In some areas the seeds are illegal to transport. But if you eat them, ! won't tell on you. AKA water caltrop, bull nut, bat nut. 220 Nuts attached on the rosette underside 