AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
tubers will also float be to dried the surface. and Tubers can be baked, fried, or boiled and mashed like polator
they Lateral can shoots are okay ground but into hot cereal or flour. They are preferable peeted and cooking
Flower raw best cooked. Leaves, when young and tender. are eye ollant impalatable after CAM
then draining. spike shoots, well before any flowers open, can also be boiled. (If steamed or briling fried and ihe
grapefruit peel flavor is strong.) Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: The tubers make one of the best starchy wild foods
and their potato-sweet corn-grapefruit flavor is liked by most who
try them; they were formerly a staple food in some regions. Wapato
often grows in enormous pure stands, especially along the Missis-
sippi River. Wapato is cultivated in China. The greens and shoots
are less well known but also make good vegetables. All parts have a
grapefruit peel flavor when raw. AKA arrowhead. All members of this
genus are edible. Annual species have edible greens but no tubers.
10 Spoon-leaved wapato Sagittaria rigida
has smaller leaf blades that lack lobes (and thus are not S. rigida arrowhead- grows
Spoon-leaved wapato of this species resemble those of water-plantain, but The edible uses
shaped). Wider leaves water and has a petiole many times longer than the leaf. have wilted this
in much deeper but all parts are smaller. Even when the leaves (sessile), and the
are the same as wapato, by the seed balls clinging directly to the balls. stem The tubers of this
plant can odd be tendency identified to curve dramatically just above those seed tasty.
species stem's are harder, tawny colored, spherical, and not quite as
223
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR tubers will also float be to dried the surface. and Tubers can be baked, fried, or boiled and mashed like polator they Lateral can shoots are okay ground but into hot cereal or flour. They are preferable peeted and cooking Flower raw best cooked. Leaves, when young and tender. are eye ollant impalatable after CAM then draining. spike shoots, well before any flowers open, can also be boiled. (If steamed or briling fried and ihe grapefruit peel flavor is strong.) Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: The tubers make one of the best starchy wild foods and their potato-sweet corn-grapefruit flavor is liked by most who try them; they were formerly a staple food in some regions. Wapato often grows in enormous pure stands, especially along the Missis- sippi River. Wapato is cultivated in China. The greens and shoots are less well known but also make good vegetables. All parts have a grapefruit peel flavor when raw. AKA arrowhead. All members of this genus are edible. Annual species have edible greens but no tubers. 10 Spoon-leaved wapato Sagittaria rigida has smaller leaf blades that lack lobes (and thus are not S. rigida arrowhead- grows Spoon-leaved wapato of this species resemble those of water-plantain, but The edible uses shaped). Wider leaves water and has a petiole many times longer than the leaf. have wilted this in much deeper but all parts are smaller. Even when the leaves (sessile), and the are the same as wapato, by the seed balls clinging directly to the balls. stem The tubers of this plant can odd be tendency identified to curve dramatically just above those seed tasty. species stem's are harder, tawny colored, spherical, and not quite as 223 