AQUATICS-NOT
2
2
LII
FH-101
2
9
Wapato Sagittaria latifolia 3 family Alismataceae
QUICK CHECK: Emergent leaves with two backward-pointing lobes about as long as
DESCRIPTION: the main blade ID Transient difficulty perennial 2. sprouting rising from 1-5' tubers (30-150 distant cm) from high, the with parent two and
plant. Sap milky. Leaves all basal. long in rosettes, as the blade. Blades 8-32" (20-80 pointed-both cm) long forms
backward-pointing 0,6-20" (1.5-50 on cm) the lobes wide, same about broad plant. as with The a rounded lobes are tip always or very pointed. terminating narrow and Major in the veins leaf flat and above lobe and tips. protruding Margins have below, for no
radiating may be present in a spider-like much pattern longer from than the the leaf blade, base tapered, and spongy the with lower air-filled fifth tubes, with broad, rounded thin, except tapered
teeth. Petioles usually smooth and hairless, cm) tall and
wings forming at the stalk's apex, the have three waxy 3,
a small flat face a on deep the channel. upper/inside Stalk surface, simple, naked, thick, spongy, flowers angled, in hairless, 3-9 widely to 28" spaced (70 whorls of
0.9" (23 mm) thick. Inflorescence a raceme 0,5-1.5" (13-38 mm) long, with a single bract. Flowers sexual parts in
each on an ascending, thick pedicel notched petals and a fuzzy-looking greenish mound of numerous hundreds together in a
white, nearly Fruit round flattened, or faintly dry, winged seeds (achenes) with a hook at the end, borne sections, dead
the center. Tuber 1-3.5" (2.5-9 cm) long, egg-shaped to occasionally flattened, with ringed is purple,
ball-like cluster. and a pointed, curved, fang-like bud projecting from the end. The smooth skin creamy, borne singly at
leafy veils, or brown in color; the white to creamy-yellow flesh is crisp and not fibrous. Tubers are
the rusty, end of long, unbranched, spongy rhizomes up to 5' (1.5 m) long and 1" (2.5 cm) thick.
CONFUSING PLANTS: The backward-pointing lobes of pickerelweed leaves are blunt rather than pointed,
and the veins follow the contour of the lobes without terminating there. Arrow arum lobes are proportionately
smaller and point more outward; see the photos for venation differences. Neither of these plants has any
underground part that even remotely resembles a wapato.
HABITAT: Lakeshores, river edges, ponds, ditches, marshes. Grows best with a clay-mud bottom and ran-
domly fluctuating water levels. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather tubers either by following rhizomes from the plant base to their ends, or by digging in
the mud in thick colonies. Where there is standing water, stomp systematically to break up the mud; released
222
emerging leaf shoot at the stage for eating.
Leaf shape is highly variable. At far left is a newly
AQUATICS-NOT 2 2 LII FH-101 2 9 Wapato Sagittaria latifolia 3 family Alismataceae QUICK CHECK: Emergent leaves with two backward-pointing lobes about as long as DESCRIPTION: the main blade ID Transient difficulty perennial 2. sprouting rising from 1-5' tubers (30-150 distant cm) from high, the with parent two and plant. Sap milky. Leaves all basal. long in rosettes, as the blade. Blades 8-32" (20-80 pointed-both cm) long forms backward-pointing 0,6-20" (1.5-50 on cm) the lobes wide, same about broad plant. as with The a rounded lobes are tip always or very pointed. terminating narrow and Major in the veins leaf flat and above lobe and tips. protruding Margins have below, for no radiating may be present in a spider-like much pattern longer from than the the leaf blade, base tapered, and spongy the with lower air-filled fifth tubes, with broad, rounded thin, except tapered teeth. Petioles usually smooth and hairless, cm) tall and wings forming at the stalk's apex, the have three waxy 3, a small flat face a on deep the channel. upper/inside Stalk surface, simple, naked, thick, spongy, flowers angled, in hairless, 3-9 widely to 28" spaced (70 whorls of 0.9" (23 mm) thick. Inflorescence a raceme 0,5-1.5" (13-38 mm) long, with a single bract. Flowers sexual parts in each on an ascending, thick pedicel notched petals and a fuzzy-looking greenish mound of numerous hundreds together in a white, nearly Fruit round flattened, or faintly dry, winged seeds (achenes) with a hook at the end, borne sections, dead the center. Tuber 1-3.5" (2.5-9 cm) long, egg-shaped to occasionally flattened, with ringed is purple, ball-like cluster. and a pointed, curved, fang-like bud projecting from the end. The smooth skin creamy, borne singly at leafy veils, or brown in color; the white to creamy-yellow flesh is crisp and not fibrous. Tubers are the rusty, end of long, unbranched, spongy rhizomes up to 5' (1.5 m) long and 1" (2.5 cm) thick. CONFUSING PLANTS: The backward-pointing lobes of pickerelweed leaves are blunt rather than pointed, and the veins follow the contour of the lobes without terminating there. Arrow arum lobes are proportionately smaller and point more outward; see the photos for venation differences. Neither of these plants has any underground part that even remotely resembles a wapato. HABITAT: Lakeshores, river edges, ponds, ditches, marshes. Grows best with a clay-mud bottom and ran- domly fluctuating water levels. Native. FOOD USE: Gather tubers either by following rhizomes from the plant base to their ends, or by digging in the mud in thick colonies. Where there is standing water, stomp systematically to break up the mud; released 222 emerging leaf shoot at the stage for eating. Leaf shape is highly variable. At far left is a newly 