AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
11 Water-plantain
2
2
Alisma plantago-aquatica family Alismataceae
Rosette of entire. elliptic, parallel veined leaves 2. on long petioles;
QUICK Christmas CHECK lipe like inflorescence of compound whorls ID difficulty
Perennial. Corms stout, amorphous, hard, the outside with numerous all in a
DESCRIPTION: thin. hairlike roots; the inside light yellowish. Sap milky. Leaves 9-14, leaves
tough. rosette. dark. be submerged, floating, or emerged, but the most prominent end tapered,
emerge. Blades are elliptic heart-shaped to nearly base, hairless. Midvein and secondary veins not depressed above. the middle; There
basal may round, entire, 3-9" (8-23 cm) long, neither
oct asionally with a of secondary veins diverging near the base, and another pair just below and unbroken
are of 2 these prominent pairs near the leaf tip. Veinlets numerous, prominent, running straight, parallel, D-shaped in cross
between and the times the blade length (shorter on early leaves). Stalk single and leafless, to 45"
all converge midvein and secondary veins. Petioles spongy, hairless, thick, not channeled, (114 cm)
tall, section unbranched 0.8-3 in the lower third, the surface smooth, glaucous, often red-tinted, the center spongy-hollow;
cross section with 3 or more gentle, smooth-topped ridges. Inflorescence a large branching panicle wider at
the base (Christmas-tree shaped), the branches in whorls of up to 6, each with whorls of smaller branches
bearing umbels or compound umbels, the pedicels very thin. There are
3 sheathing lanceolate bracts beneath inflorescence junctures. Flow-
ers (midsummer) 6-8 mm across with 3 thin white petals alternating
with 3 green sepais half as long. Fruit (fall) tiny, flattened, oval, and
dry with a central groove; many of these are pressed together to form
a doughnut-shaped mass.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Some species of wapato with unlabed leaves
are similar, but they have proportionately longer petioles.
HABITAT: Muddy shores, pond margins, vernal pools, seasonal
puddles or wet depressions-prefers full or partial sun. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather corms from fall through spring by grabbing them
just below the base of the plant and pulling them out of the muck. Rinse
and detach the hair-like roots. Corms are hard and unpalatable raw,
better cooked. They are
best used sparingly,
more as a seasoning.
Tender young leaves
and shoots, collected
in spring and early
summer, can be used
as potherbs- the flavor
resembles that of its
close relative wapato,
Conservation 3/2,
COMMENTS: call
the corms "Pine-Sol
polatoes because of
their smell The plantis
Killed when the corms
are harvested. SO
Bather sparingly The
shoots are super tender
ano excellent cooked
Other species In this
genus art presumably
edible but the IS the
Everned
244
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR 11 Water-plantain 2 2 Alisma plantago-aquatica family Alismataceae Rosette of entire. elliptic, parallel veined leaves 2. on long petioles; QUICK Christmas CHECK lipe like inflorescence of compound whorls ID difficulty Perennial. Corms stout, amorphous, hard, the outside with numerous all in a DESCRIPTION: thin. hairlike roots; the inside light yellowish. Sap milky. Leaves 9-14, leaves tough. rosette. dark. be submerged, floating, or emerged, but the most prominent end tapered, emerge. Blades are elliptic heart-shaped to nearly base, hairless. Midvein and secondary veins not depressed above. the middle; There basal may round, entire, 3-9" (8-23 cm) long, neither oct asionally with a of secondary veins diverging near the base, and another pair just below and unbroken are of 2 these prominent pairs near the leaf tip. Veinlets numerous, prominent, running straight, parallel, D-shaped in cross between and the times the blade length (shorter on early leaves). Stalk single and leafless, to 45" all converge midvein and secondary veins. Petioles spongy, hairless, thick, not channeled, (114 cm) tall, section unbranched 0.8-3 in the lower third, the surface smooth, glaucous, often red-tinted, the center spongy-hollow; cross section with 3 or more gentle, smooth-topped ridges. Inflorescence a large branching panicle wider at the base (Christmas-tree shaped), the branches in whorls of up to 6, each with whorls of smaller branches bearing umbels or compound umbels, the pedicels very thin. There are 3 sheathing lanceolate bracts beneath inflorescence junctures. Flow- ers (midsummer) 6-8 mm across with 3 thin white petals alternating with 3 green sepais half as long. Fruit (fall) tiny, flattened, oval, and dry with a central groove; many of these are pressed together to form a doughnut-shaped mass. CONFUSING PLANTS: Some species of wapato with unlabed leaves are similar, but they have proportionately longer petioles. HABITAT: Muddy shores, pond margins, vernal pools, seasonal puddles or wet depressions-prefers full or partial sun. Native. FOOD USE: Gather corms from fall through spring by grabbing them just below the base of the plant and pulling them out of the muck. Rinse and detach the hair-like roots. Corms are hard and unpalatable raw, better cooked. They are best used sparingly, more as a seasoning. Tender young leaves and shoots, collected in spring and early summer, can be used as potherbs- the flavor resembles that of its close relative wapato, Conservation 3/2, COMMENTS: call the corms "Pine-Sol polatoes because of their smell The plantis Killed when the corms are harvested. SO Bather sparingly The shoots are super tender ano excellent cooked Other species In this genus art presumably edible but the IS the Everned 244 