0
1cm
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
12 Water shield
1
Brasenia schreberi
family Cabombaceae
QUICK CHECK: Oblong lily pads smaller than your hand, with a slimy underside
ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by creeping rootstocks 6-8 mm thick. All underwa-
ter parts are coated with a thick layer of jelly-slime. Stems roughly rounded, 6-8 mm thick,
rope-like, to 9' (3 m) long. Leaves alternate, 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, elliptic, peltate with the
long petiole attached near the center, entire, the blade rather thin if you don't count the
slime. Flower (early summer to fall) single on a stout peduncle up to 6" (15 cm) long, arising from a leaf axili
0.4-0.6" (1-1.5 cm) across with 6 recurved, lanceolate, unequal tepals, the inside surface dull purple, with
12-18 long-protruding stamens. Fruit a club-shaped leathery pod 4-8 mm long, not splitting oper. that floats
for dispersal and contains 1 or 2 seeds.
HABITAT: Shallows of lakes, slow rivers, and ponds. Native.
FOOD USE: Young leaves, still coiled, are traditionally used in soups in East Asia. Chop fine to avoid eating a
giant slime gob. I have also heard of eating them raw, but I worry about parasites on raw aquatic veget an es
directly in contact with water. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: Some sources refer to edible tubers on this plant. I wish. This grows all over the lakes near
me. I have dug the rhizomes many times and have never found a tuber, or anything tuber-like. Besides No.
America, this fascinating plant is native in Asia, parts of Africa, and also Australia. It might be the single most
unmistakable species in this book-no other plant in our region is similarly slime-coated.
225
0 1cm AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR 12 Water shield 1 Brasenia schreberi family Cabombaceae QUICK CHECK: Oblong lily pads smaller than your hand, with a slimy underside ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by creeping rootstocks 6-8 mm thick. All underwa- ter parts are coated with a thick layer of jelly-slime. Stems roughly rounded, 6-8 mm thick, rope-like, to 9' (3 m) long. Leaves alternate, 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, elliptic, peltate with the long petiole attached near the center, entire, the blade rather thin if you don't count the slime. Flower (early summer to fall) single on a stout peduncle up to 6" (15 cm) long, arising from a leaf axili 0.4-0.6" (1-1.5 cm) across with 6 recurved, lanceolate, unequal tepals, the inside surface dull purple, with 12-18 long-protruding stamens. Fruit a club-shaped leathery pod 4-8 mm long, not splitting oper. that floats for dispersal and contains 1 or 2 seeds. HABITAT: Shallows of lakes, slow rivers, and ponds. Native. FOOD USE: Young leaves, still coiled, are traditionally used in soups in East Asia. Chop fine to avoid eating a giant slime gob. I have also heard of eating them raw, but I worry about parasites on raw aquatic veget an es directly in contact with water. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: Some sources refer to edible tubers on this plant. I wish. This grows all over the lakes near me. I have dug the rhizomes many times and have never found a tuber, or anything tuber-like. Besides No. America, this fascinating plant is native in Asia, parts of Africa, and also Australia. It might be the single most unmistakable species in this book-no other plant in our region is similarly slime-coated. 225 