AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
2
3
1
NG-99
13 American lotus
Nelumbo lutea family Nelumbonaceae
QUICK CNECK Large pads floating or emergent, with no slit, enormous flowers and
fiat seedheads ID difficulty 1. tubers, forming large colonies of "lily pads" ranging by from fast-
DESCRIPTION: Perennial Tubers from about the size and shape of a banana, inside. Leaves
growing. smooth vellow rhizomes. or brown. with are distinct symmetrical air chambers borne singly
floating off-white or to emergent, dull on round, the rhizomes. up to 34" Pad (86 edges cm) across, are upturned. with no Floating slit or cut-out, leaves are flat at but the emergent center of leaves the leaf. are
and widely spaced rigid, to 7' (2.1 m) long, erect, rough, attached and when broken
broadly funnel-shaped. rhizomes, Petiole and tubers up have hollow air channels running lengthwise, an unbranched erect
Flower stalks. elastic, petioles. silk-like threads trailing from them. Inflorescence borne singly atop surface or several
have fine, identical to the petiole, rising directly from the rhizome to the water's funnel-like
scape essentially it. Flowers creamy yellow, 6-9" (15-23 cm) across, with numerous ovate petals and a cm)
feet above receptacie in the center. Receptacle becomes more broadly funnel-shaped, growing 4-9" (10-23 flexible
yellow wide. first green then brown, holding 12-30 nuts about 90% enclosed. Nuts acorn-like with a thin,
shell and a single mass inside, about 0.7" (18 mm) long at ripening, drying and shrinking to about 0.5" (13 mm)
and becoming very hard.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Water lilies (Nymphaea) and pond lilies (Nuphar) have smaller, oblong leaves with
a slit-like sinus.
HABITAT: Rivers, ponds, lakes, sloughs. Prefers solid bottom of sand or clay. In the North it is confined to
large lakes and river systems; further south is more of a generalist. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather tubers from late summer through spring. Dig along the rhizomes, usually 1-6' (30-180 cm)
from the petiole base. Young, tender tubers can be peeled and sliced for eating raw, or used in stir-fry with other
vegetables. Older tubers are firm and starchy and should be well cooked. Nuts ripen from late summer through
fall. Ripe seedheads detach from the stem easily. Soft, moist nuts can be eaten raw or roasted. Dried nuts will keep
for a lifetime with no
loss in quality; they can
be cracked and boiled
or ground for flour or
meal. Newly emerging
leaves are also eaten,
especially as a wrap
for vegetables and rice.
Conservation 2/1/1
COMMENTS: One of
the best wild staple
foods in North Amer-
168 lotus is produc-
live and delicious. It is
aiso hated as d "weed"
by many boaters and
dishermen
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR 2 3 1 NG-99 13 American lotus Nelumbo lutea family Nelumbonaceae QUICK CNECK Large pads floating or emergent, with no slit, enormous flowers and fiat seedheads ID difficulty 1. tubers, forming large colonies of "lily pads" ranging by from fast- DESCRIPTION: Perennial Tubers from about the size and shape of a banana, inside. Leaves growing. smooth vellow rhizomes. or brown. with are distinct symmetrical air chambers borne singly floating off-white or to emergent, dull on round, the rhizomes. up to 34" Pad (86 edges cm) across, are upturned. with no Floating slit or cut-out, leaves are flat at but the emergent center of leaves the leaf. are and widely spaced rigid, to 7' (2.1 m) long, erect, rough, attached and when broken broadly funnel-shaped. rhizomes, Petiole and tubers up have hollow air channels running lengthwise, an unbranched erect Flower stalks. elastic, petioles. silk-like threads trailing from them. Inflorescence borne singly atop surface or several have fine, identical to the petiole, rising directly from the rhizome to the water's funnel-like scape essentially it. Flowers creamy yellow, 6-9" (15-23 cm) across, with numerous ovate petals and a cm) feet above receptacie in the center. Receptacle becomes more broadly funnel-shaped, growing 4-9" (10-23 flexible yellow wide. first green then brown, holding 12-30 nuts about 90% enclosed. Nuts acorn-like with a thin, shell and a single mass inside, about 0.7" (18 mm) long at ripening, drying and shrinking to about 0.5" (13 mm) and becoming very hard. CONFUSING PLANTS: Water lilies (Nymphaea) and pond lilies (Nuphar) have smaller, oblong leaves with a slit-like sinus. HABITAT: Rivers, ponds, lakes, sloughs. Prefers solid bottom of sand or clay. In the North it is confined to large lakes and river systems; further south is more of a generalist. Native. FOOD USE: Gather tubers from late summer through spring. Dig along the rhizomes, usually 1-6' (30-180 cm) from the petiole base. Young, tender tubers can be peeled and sliced for eating raw, or used in stir-fry with other vegetables. Older tubers are firm and starchy and should be well cooked. Nuts ripen from late summer through fall. Ripe seedheads detach from the stem easily. Soft, moist nuts can be eaten raw or roasted. Dried nuts will keep for a lifetime with no loss in quality; they can be cracked and boiled or ground for flour or meal. Newly emerging leaves are also eaten, especially as a wrap for vegetables and rice. Conservation 2/1/1 COMMENTS: One of the best wild staple foods in North Amer- 168 lotus is produc- live and delicious. It is aiso hated as d "weed" by many boaters and dishermen 