oceae
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
14 Yellow pond-lily
1
2
genus Nuphar
family Nymphaeaceae
QUICK CHECK: Elliptic lily pads with a slit at one end; yellow Howers ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: several feet Aquatic perennial with large floating or slightly emergent leaves.
Leaves
zomes long and up to 5" (13 cm) thick, roughened like a palm trunk Rhi-
scars, variously yellow, green, or brown. They kind of look like giant underwater by old leaf
Leaves elliptic, to 24" (60 cm) long, with two rounded and often overlapping lobes snakes
base, the blades hairless and smooth on top. Midvein wide and obscure, slightly raised at the
above and keeled below; secondary veins nearly flat. Margins are entire. Petioles 1-6' (30-180
0.5-0.9" (13-23 mm) wide, spongy inside, rounded below, the top nearly flat but slightly raised, the cm)
nearly sharp. Flowers (late spring through summer) single at the end of a long spongy and sometimes margins
stalk, held at or slightly above the water's surface, 1.5-2.5" (4-6 cm) across with 6 broad, blunt, overlapping. nairy
cupped yellow petals (sepals). Fruit a pod 1.5"-2.5" (4-6 cm) long with a bulging base, fluted sides. and flaced
distal end. The interior is slimy with numerous brownish-yellow egg-shaped seeds about 4 mm long.
CONFUSING PLANTS: White water lilies (genus Nymphaea) have rounded rather than elliptic leaves.
HABITAT: Warm lakes, ponds, sloughs, and slow-moving rivers with muck bottoms, in water 1-6' (30-180-m)
deep. Native.
FOOD USE: Rhizomes can be peeled and boiled in several changes of water, after which they are marg
edible-fresh they are exceptionally bitter. Gather ripe pods from early summer through early fall. from
canoe or by wading. Let them sit in water for a few days to soften, then mash them and strain the seeds
the pulp. Soak, rub, and rinse the seeds to get rid of the bitter flavor of the pulp residue. After this they
be eaten popped, boiled, or ground into flour. Conservation 3, 1.
COMMENTS: I advise ignoring the many reports that the rhizomes of these plants are edible. Simply cooked
they taste terrible and
have made many people
ill. Through numerous
changes of water you
can make them margin-
ally edible. The seeds.
however, are definitely
edible, and have been an
important food source
in several regions of the
world.
oceae AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR 14 Yellow pond-lily 1 2 genus Nuphar family Nymphaeaceae QUICK CHECK: Elliptic lily pads with a slit at one end; yellow Howers ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: several feet Aquatic perennial with large floating or slightly emergent leaves. Leaves zomes long and up to 5" (13 cm) thick, roughened like a palm trunk Rhi- scars, variously yellow, green, or brown. They kind of look like giant underwater by old leaf Leaves elliptic, to 24" (60 cm) long, with two rounded and often overlapping lobes snakes base, the blades hairless and smooth on top. Midvein wide and obscure, slightly raised at the above and keeled below; secondary veins nearly flat. Margins are entire. Petioles 1-6' (30-180 0.5-0.9" (13-23 mm) wide, spongy inside, rounded below, the top nearly flat but slightly raised, the cm) nearly sharp. Flowers (late spring through summer) single at the end of a long spongy and sometimes margins stalk, held at or slightly above the water's surface, 1.5-2.5" (4-6 cm) across with 6 broad, blunt, overlapping. nairy cupped yellow petals (sepals). Fruit a pod 1.5"-2.5" (4-6 cm) long with a bulging base, fluted sides. and flaced distal end. The interior is slimy with numerous brownish-yellow egg-shaped seeds about 4 mm long. CONFUSING PLANTS: White water lilies (genus Nymphaea) have rounded rather than elliptic leaves. HABITAT: Warm lakes, ponds, sloughs, and slow-moving rivers with muck bottoms, in water 1-6' (30-180-m) deep. Native. FOOD USE: Rhizomes can be peeled and boiled in several changes of water, after which they are marg edible-fresh they are exceptionally bitter. Gather ripe pods from early summer through early fall. from canoe or by wading. Let them sit in water for a few days to soften, then mash them and strain the seeds the pulp. Soak, rub, and rinse the seeds to get rid of the bitter flavor of the pulp residue. After this they be eaten popped, boiled, or ground into flour. Conservation 3, 1. COMMENTS: I advise ignoring the many reports that the rhizomes of these plants are edible. Simply cooked they taste terrible and have made many people ill. Through numerous changes of water you can make them margin- ally edible. The seeds. however, are definitely edible, and have been an important food source in several regions of the world. 