AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
16 Wild taro
Colocasia esculenta
Araceae
(Arum
family)
UICK CHECK: Tall basal leaves, arrow-shaped with blunt labos, not
to the petiole. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Aquatic perennial forming dense colonies of basal rosettes growing
from a 2-4" (5-10 cm) corm with numerous attached roots. Blade smooth and hairless.
9-24" (23-60 cm) long, held about 80° to the petiole, thin, with two blunt, back-pointing
lobes, the blade not cut all the way to the petiole between the lobes (peltate). The leaf tip has
a boat-like projection 3-4 mm long. Sap is not milky. Midvein and secondary veins protrude above and
so below. Secondary veins are wide and prominent, most running straight to the edges; 4-5 emanate
the petiole is attached, these only branching in the lobes. Major veins have faint, light, lengthwise
the surface. A double vein runs just inside the leaf margin on its entire perimeter; all interior veins
Veinlets between secondary veins are numerous, faintly raised above, and flat below. Veinlets or ginate
secondary vein, almost at a right angle to it, but each one then curves out toward the margin Margins
but wavy. Petioles straight, erect, tough, smooth, hairless, solid, not channeled, juicy inside, oxidizing brown
few minutes, to 4.5' (1.4 m) tall. Inflorescence a single, large, erect spathe atop a thick stem much shor Bar
the leaves, the hood green at the base and dull orange above, scrolled so the top is pointed; there
ing near the bottom by which the spike is revealed. Flowers are rarely produced, and I've never seen the
CONFUSING PLANTS: Wapato and arrow arum both have similarly shaped leaves but they are not
and the vein patterns differ. Wapato has milky sap.
HABITAT: Shallow water along lakes and slow streams. ditones
and ponds, in full sun to moderate shade. Introduced. Scabered
but widespread; abundant where found. I
FOOD USE: The corms can be long-roasted as a starchy
vegetable.
WARNING: Wild taro cannot be treated like donte stical
It must be more extensively processed for its raphides
COMMENTS: This species is a major staple in many tropical
parts of the world; however, the domesticated form has undergone
thousands of years of selection to increase the corm size and
importantly, reduce the concentration of raphides to only much
more fraction of that found in wild plants. Wild taro requires safe
tiny careful preparation than the domestic form to make ⑆
more fresh wild taro (don't do it!) makes me marvel that makes people one
Tasting figured out that these could be detoxified: domestication. it also
appreciate ever the improvements made through
229
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR 16 Wild taro Colocasia esculenta Araceae (Arum family) UICK CHECK: Tall basal leaves, arrow-shaped with blunt labos, not to the petiole. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Aquatic perennial forming dense colonies of basal rosettes growing from a 2-4" (5-10 cm) corm with numerous attached roots. Blade smooth and hairless. 9-24" (23-60 cm) long, held about 80° to the petiole, thin, with two blunt, back-pointing lobes, the blade not cut all the way to the petiole between the lobes (peltate). The leaf tip has a boat-like projection 3-4 mm long. Sap is not milky. Midvein and secondary veins protrude above and so below. Secondary veins are wide and prominent, most running straight to the edges; 4-5 emanate the petiole is attached, these only branching in the lobes. Major veins have faint, light, lengthwise the surface. A double vein runs just inside the leaf margin on its entire perimeter; all interior veins Veinlets between secondary veins are numerous, faintly raised above, and flat below. Veinlets or ginate secondary vein, almost at a right angle to it, but each one then curves out toward the margin Margins but wavy. Petioles straight, erect, tough, smooth, hairless, solid, not channeled, juicy inside, oxidizing brown few minutes, to 4.5' (1.4 m) tall. Inflorescence a single, large, erect spathe atop a thick stem much shor Bar the leaves, the hood green at the base and dull orange above, scrolled so the top is pointed; there ing near the bottom by which the spike is revealed. Flowers are rarely produced, and I've never seen the CONFUSING PLANTS: Wapato and arrow arum both have similarly shaped leaves but they are not and the vein patterns differ. Wapato has milky sap. HABITAT: Shallow water along lakes and slow streams. ditones and ponds, in full sun to moderate shade. Introduced. Scabered but widespread; abundant where found. I FOOD USE: The corms can be long-roasted as a starchy vegetable. WARNING: Wild taro cannot be treated like donte stical It must be more extensively processed for its raphides COMMENTS: This species is a major staple in many tropical parts of the world; however, the domesticated form has undergone thousands of years of selection to increase the corm size and importantly, reduce the concentration of raphides to only much more fraction of that found in wild plants. Wild taro requires safe tiny careful preparation than the domestic form to make ⑆ more fresh wild taro (don't do it!) makes me marvel that makes people one Tasting figured out that these could be detoxified: domestication. it also appreciate ever the improvements made through 229 