AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
15 Arrow
Peltandra arum virginica Araceae (Arum family)
Arrowhead shaped leaves with round-tipped difficulty lobes 2. and no milky sap;
flowers on a club vertical rootstock. Leaves all basal, lobes the shorter blades
QUICK CHECK: wrapped inside a greenish spathe. ID
DESCRIPTION: Perennial arrowhead-shaped, with a thick, the tip pointed or rounded, closely!). the Surfaces
8-22" (20-56 cm) long, leaf portion, each with a rounded point (look and rounded below.
There whitish are than hairless. the is and forward-pointing a prominent, closely Midvein spaced, straight flat or running vein broadly from mostly depressed the base unbranched to above, the tip and and of protruding may each straight be lobe. slightly from Secondary depressed the midvein veins or numerous, almost have a to lighter the veins flat margin, above, green stop.
at broad angles; the a few margin of them is a vein are more or two prominent, running parallel to the edge; at this the is edge, where thick the and secondary spongy, the outer
halo. Just inside blade length, attached channeled
Margins are entire. Petioles 1.2-3 times the around adjacent leaves; above the sheath the petiole is than the
ones with a sheath less, at finally the base becoming wrapping nearly round. Stalk a thick leafless scape, a long, erect narrow and shorter spike, white at
around erect first leaves progressively later spathe when the yellow-orange, fruit, in 4-8" bloom, which (10-20 curving is a the cm) cluster flowers long downward of with tapered tiny, light, or without falling berries wavy petals. limp margins. embedded in The fruit. The spike Inflorescence in lower slime, is partially part each of pointed hidden the spathe in at a the scrolled, persists base, 7-12 pointed, pod-like mm
long, green turning shiny purple-brown, containing 1-3 seeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Taro petioles are not attached at the leaf edge. Wapato has milky sap and multiple
major veins running onto each lobe.
HABITAT: Mucky shallow water along riv-
ers, lakes, and ponds, in full to partial sun.
Native.
FOOD USE: The rootstock can be eaten
after baking for an exceptionally long time.
I've done this once. Conservation 3.
WARNING: Contains calcium oxalate
raphides (p. 22). This plant cannot be eaten
without careful processing!
COMMENTS: There are old historical
accounts suggesting that this was once an
important staple food in the mid-Atlantic
region-although the identity has been
questioned. I am aware of no Indigenous
people practicing this tradition today. Before
processing the rootstocks taste nearly iden-
tical to those of its relative, wild taro-which
is to say, SQ horribly painful in the mouth
that if there is any flavor, you are not going
to notice it. Perhaps, after several thousand
years of cultivation, this might be turned
into a fantastic vegetable like taro As it now
stands, arrow arumits not di practical food
plant for modern: loragers, but it is included
here for historica interest AKA luckahoe.
Note that there 15 also fungus, Wolfiporia,
which produces a lerotium that goes by
the name "Lue kahoe' This is basic ally a loaf
of ureau that Brows underground, excellent
and sustaining law 5) roasted Confusing the
two outo be CI paintal experience
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR 15 Arrow Peltandra arum virginica Araceae (Arum family) Arrowhead shaped leaves with round-tipped difficulty lobes 2. and no milky sap; flowers on a club vertical rootstock. Leaves all basal, lobes the shorter blades QUICK CHECK: wrapped inside a greenish spathe. ID DESCRIPTION: Perennial arrowhead-shaped, with a thick, the tip pointed or rounded, closely!). the Surfaces 8-22" (20-56 cm) long, leaf portion, each with a rounded point (look and rounded below. There whitish are than hairless. the is and forward-pointing a prominent, closely Midvein spaced, straight flat or running vein broadly from mostly depressed the base unbranched to above, the tip and and of protruding may each straight be lobe. slightly from Secondary depressed the midvein veins or numerous, almost have a to lighter the veins flat margin, above, green stop. at broad angles; the a few margin of them is a vein are more or two prominent, running parallel to the edge; at this the is edge, where thick the and secondary spongy, the outer halo. Just inside blade length, attached channeled Margins are entire. Petioles 1.2-3 times the around adjacent leaves; above the sheath the petiole is than the ones with a sheath less, at finally the base becoming wrapping nearly round. Stalk a thick leafless scape, a long, erect narrow and shorter spike, white at around erect first leaves progressively later spathe when the yellow-orange, fruit, in 4-8" bloom, which (10-20 curving is a the cm) cluster flowers long downward of with tapered tiny, light, or without falling berries wavy petals. limp margins. embedded in The fruit. The spike Inflorescence in lower slime, is partially part each of pointed hidden the spathe in at a the scrolled, persists base, 7-12 pointed, pod-like mm long, green turning shiny purple-brown, containing 1-3 seeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: Taro petioles are not attached at the leaf edge. Wapato has milky sap and multiple major veins running onto each lobe. HABITAT: Mucky shallow water along riv- ers, lakes, and ponds, in full to partial sun. Native. FOOD USE: The rootstock can be eaten after baking for an exceptionally long time. I've done this once. Conservation 3. WARNING: Contains calcium oxalate raphides (p. 22). This plant cannot be eaten without careful processing! COMMENTS: There are old historical accounts suggesting that this was once an important staple food in the mid-Atlantic region-although the identity has been questioned. I am aware of no Indigenous people practicing this tradition today. Before processing the rootstocks taste nearly iden- tical to those of its relative, wild taro-which is to say, SQ horribly painful in the mouth that if there is any flavor, you are not going to notice it. Perhaps, after several thousand years of cultivation, this might be turned into a fantastic vegetable like taro As it now stands, arrow arumits not di practical food plant for modern: loragers, but it is included here for historica interest AKA luckahoe. Note that there 15 also fungus, Wolfiporia, which produces a lerotium that goes by the name "Lue kahoe' This is basic ally a loaf of ureau that Brows underground, excellent and sustaining law 5) roasted Confusing the two outo be CI paintal experience 