AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUDULAR
17 Water hyacinth
2
family
Pontederiaceae
Eichhornia mudflats or open water, with inflated petioles difficulty and 1. entire
crassipes
QUICK that CHECK: are broader Rosettes than in long; spike of showy purple flowers. ID
blades rosettes; spreading by smooth, unbranched rhizomes fine hair-like about
DESCRIPTION: Perennial in soft mud with near the surface, numerous and feathery with the very margins entire
rootlets. Leaves (5-10 Both surfaces are smooth and hairless. Veins begin but older
6 mm thick. Roots 2-4' cm) wide, curled, wider than long, not lobed, at the base, fan
and the tip curve rounded. back toward the tip; there is no evident midvein on younger leaves, New leaves
Rapidly
expanding.
out, and have the midvein and a few other veins raised on the upper surface. about
are ones wrapped may tightly around the inflated petiole of a neighboring leaf. Petioles spongy,
1 cm thick at the base, then inflat-
ing to a bladder-like structure before
narrowing again; outer petioles
are strongly curved back toward
the center. Inflorescence a single
spike of 7-18 flowers on a thick
unbranched stem rising 8-20"
(20-60 cm) from the center of the
rosette. The stem is smooth, hair-
less, round with a pinhole hollow,
spongy inside with spiderweb-like
fibers when broken. There are two
overlapping sheaths near the top,
one of which has a miniature leaf
at its tip. The rachis of the spike
is densely covered in fine, curvy,
soft hairs. Flowers light purple
with 4 petals 1-1.3" (25-33 mm)
long, the upper petal largest with
a yellow spot in the center sur-
rounded by blue. The bases are
tubular, green, and curved out-
ward. Fruit a 3-part capsule 1 cm
long containing numerous tiny
winged seeds.
HABITAT: Warm, stagnant or
slow-moving water, especially
with a muddy bottom or shoreline;
thrives in full sun. Introduced. I
FOOD USE: Tender young leaves
can be used as a potherb. The
newest leaves are extremely
tender but slightly irritating if
eaten.raw.
COMMENTS: Considered one
of the worst invasive plants of
the South, water hyacinth has
become abundant over extensive
areas and is spreading northward
Some people have reported an
itchy rear end after eating this
plant haven't checked this out
AKA Pontederia crassipes
230
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUDULAR 17 Water hyacinth 2 family Pontederiaceae Eichhornia mudflats or open water, with inflated petioles difficulty and 1. entire crassipes QUICK that CHECK: are broader Rosettes than in long; spike of showy purple flowers. ID blades rosettes; spreading by smooth, unbranched rhizomes fine hair-like about DESCRIPTION: Perennial in soft mud with near the surface, numerous and feathery with the very margins entire rootlets. Leaves (5-10 Both surfaces are smooth and hairless. Veins begin but older 6 mm thick. Roots 2-4' cm) wide, curled, wider than long, not lobed, at the base, fan and the tip curve rounded. back toward the tip; there is no evident midvein on younger leaves, New leaves Rapidly expanding. out, and have the midvein and a few other veins raised on the upper surface. about are ones wrapped may tightly around the inflated petiole of a neighboring leaf. Petioles spongy, 1 cm thick at the base, then inflat- ing to a bladder-like structure before narrowing again; outer petioles are strongly curved back toward the center. Inflorescence a single spike of 7-18 flowers on a thick unbranched stem rising 8-20" (20-60 cm) from the center of the rosette. The stem is smooth, hair- less, round with a pinhole hollow, spongy inside with spiderweb-like fibers when broken. There are two overlapping sheaths near the top, one of which has a miniature leaf at its tip. The rachis of the spike is densely covered in fine, curvy, soft hairs. Flowers light purple with 4 petals 1-1.3" (25-33 mm) long, the upper petal largest with a yellow spot in the center sur- rounded by blue. The bases are tubular, green, and curved out- ward. Fruit a 3-part capsule 1 cm long containing numerous tiny winged seeds. HABITAT: Warm, stagnant or slow-moving water, especially with a muddy bottom or shoreline; thrives in full sun. Introduced. I FOOD USE: Tender young leaves can be used as a potherb. The newest leaves are extremely tender but slightly irritating if eaten.raw. COMMENTS: Considered one of the worst invasive plants of the South, water hyacinth has become abundant over extensive areas and is spreading northward Some people have reported an itchy rear end after eating this plant haven't checked this out AKA Pontederia crassipes 230 