AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR
18 Pickerelweed
1
1
2
Pontederia cordata
family Pontederiaceae
QUICK and CHECK: Emergent aquatic leaves with arrowhead to heart-shaped, blunt-lobed
bases no prominent veins other than the midvein. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Emergent aquatic perennial from thick rhizomes, rooted firmly in the bot-
tom, forming dense colonies. Leaves mostly basal, elongated-heart-shaped or arrowhead-
shaped with blunt lobes, 4-10" (10-25 cm) long, standing 10-38" (25-95 cm) above the
water, the blade thick and spongy-fleshy, hairless with entire margins, Veins numerous
and equal, flat on both sides, following the contour of the leaf-not terminating in the lobes.
Petioles long, thick, spongy-soft. Stems to 44" (112 cm) tall, and 0.8" (2 cm) thick, curvy, unbranched, round
and spongy-soft, the surface smooth and hairless except near the apex, where there is fine, short, soft hair.
The stem bears a single leaf with a short petiole and a long sheath, usually just above the middle; there are also
one or two sheath-like bracts just below the flower cluster. Inflorescence a single dense spike 3-6" (8-15 cm)
long at the stalk apex, rising just above the leaves. Flowers (summer) 0.4-0.7" (1-1,8 cm) long, tubular, the tip
dividing into 6 lobes that are hairy on the outside, the largest and uppermost with a yellow spot. Fruit 6-10 mm
long, elliptic, green, with a 6-winged exterior, containing one large, soft, elliptic seed.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Wapato and arrow arum have sharper-tipped lobes in which major veins terminate
HABITAT: Shallow waters of lakes, slow-moving rivers, and ponds, especially where the bottom is soft
muck. Native.
FOOD USE: The flower cluster shoot, still wrapped in a sheath in early summer, is okay raw or cooked. The
fruit ripens in late summer and breaks easily from the cluster. The semi-soft green flesh is rather bitter with
a poor aftertaste but also has a hint of tropical fruitiness; it's worth a curious nibble. The seed is soft and oily
with good flavor, but hard to effectively separate from the flesh. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: Although widespread and often very abundant, this species is barely worth including. If I
knew of an effective way to separate the seeds from their green flesh, my assessment might change. Several
sources mention the young, tender leaves as a potherb, but this appears to be based on Fernald and Kinsey
(1943), who only suggest that the leaves might be edible because a loosely related Asian species is eaten.
Pickerelweed's leaves are formed deep underwater, then the petiole is extended to the surface. The tender
stage is tiny and takes place where it is almost inaccessible. I have gathered them on several occasions and
have found neither the flavor nor texture appealing.
231
AQUATICS-NOT GRASS-LIKE OR TUBULAR 18 Pickerelweed 1 1 2 Pontederia cordata family Pontederiaceae QUICK and CHECK: Emergent aquatic leaves with arrowhead to heart-shaped, blunt-lobed bases no prominent veins other than the midvein. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Emergent aquatic perennial from thick rhizomes, rooted firmly in the bot- tom, forming dense colonies. Leaves mostly basal, elongated-heart-shaped or arrowhead- shaped with blunt lobes, 4-10" (10-25 cm) long, standing 10-38" (25-95 cm) above the water, the blade thick and spongy-fleshy, hairless with entire margins, Veins numerous and equal, flat on both sides, following the contour of the leaf-not terminating in the lobes. Petioles long, thick, spongy-soft. Stems to 44" (112 cm) tall, and 0.8" (2 cm) thick, curvy, unbranched, round and spongy-soft, the surface smooth and hairless except near the apex, where there is fine, short, soft hair. The stem bears a single leaf with a short petiole and a long sheath, usually just above the middle; there are also one or two sheath-like bracts just below the flower cluster. Inflorescence a single dense spike 3-6" (8-15 cm) long at the stalk apex, rising just above the leaves. Flowers (summer) 0.4-0.7" (1-1,8 cm) long, tubular, the tip dividing into 6 lobes that are hairy on the outside, the largest and uppermost with a yellow spot. Fruit 6-10 mm long, elliptic, green, with a 6-winged exterior, containing one large, soft, elliptic seed. CONFUSING PLANTS: Wapato and arrow arum have sharper-tipped lobes in which major veins terminate HABITAT: Shallow waters of lakes, slow-moving rivers, and ponds, especially where the bottom is soft muck. Native. FOOD USE: The flower cluster shoot, still wrapped in a sheath in early summer, is okay raw or cooked. The fruit ripens in late summer and breaks easily from the cluster. The semi-soft green flesh is rather bitter with a poor aftertaste but also has a hint of tropical fruitiness; it's worth a curious nibble. The seed is soft and oily with good flavor, but hard to effectively separate from the flesh. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: Although widespread and often very abundant, this species is barely worth including. If I knew of an effective way to separate the seeds from their green flesh, my assessment might change. Several sources mention the young, tender leaves as a potherb, but this appears to be based on Fernald and Kinsey (1943), who only suggest that the leaves might be edible because a loosely related Asian species is eaten. Pickerelweed's leaves are formed deep underwater, then the petiole is extended to the surface. The tender stage is tiny and takes place where it is almost inaccessible. I have gathered them on several occasions and have found neither the flavor nor texture appealing. 231 