LINBAR, ENTIRE, ONION-SCENTED LEAVES
1
Ramp
3
3
3
FH-144
Allium tricoccum, A. burdickii family Alliaciae
QUICK CHECK: Onion with 2-4 large, broad, flat, elliptic leaves. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Spring ephemeral forming dense colonies by offsets. Bulb white, to 1'
(2.5 cm) wide and 2.2" (5.5 cm) long, tapered to the top, the outer layers moist and mem-
branous, with a stout vertical rhizome at the base. Leaves 2-4, flat, delicate, limp, creased
slightly in the middle but with no prominent veins, up to 4" (10 cm) wide and 12" (30 cm)
long, elliptic, tapered to a distinct petiole with a sheath 1-2.4" (2.5-6 cm) long at the base.
Sheaths are maroon or green. Leaves appear in very early spring, dying and disappearing
by early summer. Scape solid, smooth, round, hairless, straight, reddish to dull green, 7-16" (18 40 cm) tall
and 3-4 mm thick, emerging as or after the leaves die. Umbel of 14-50, spherical, 1-1.5" (25 38 mm) across
Flowers (early to mid summer) bell-like, 4-7 mm long, white, none forming bulblets. Capsule bulging, open
to reveal shiny, round, black seeds in late summer.
CONFUSING PLANTS: False hellebores (p. 674) tend to have much broader leaves. V. parviflorum and perhaps
other species in the young stage may have narrower, ramp-like leaves, but they have numerous depressed
veins and folds or ridges, which ramps
lack. Clintonia (p. 268) leaves are much
thicker and tougher and not ephemeral.
Both of these lack the onion odor.
SPECIES: The narrow-leaved ramp
A. burdickii has narrower leaves that
always have green petioles, while those
of A. tricoccum are usually (not always,
as some people claim) red. The narrow-
leaved ramp has a milder flavor and
flowers about a month earlier-the flow-
ering stem is well developed (although
unopened) before the leaves die back. It
seems to prefer more clayey soils, but the
two are sometimes found together, and
in such cases often hybridize, especially
in the northern part of their range. The
insistence by many that sheath/petiole
color definitively distinguishes these spe-
cies has led to great confusion; there are
many clear distinctions which are not very
"keyable." (Continued on the next page.)
233
LINBAR, ENTIRE, ONION-SCENTED LEAVES 1 Ramp 3 3 3 FH-144 Allium tricoccum, A. burdickii family Alliaciae QUICK CHECK: Onion with 2-4 large, broad, flat, elliptic leaves. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Spring ephemeral forming dense colonies by offsets. Bulb white, to 1' (2.5 cm) wide and 2.2" (5.5 cm) long, tapered to the top, the outer layers moist and mem- branous, with a stout vertical rhizome at the base. Leaves 2-4, flat, delicate, limp, creased slightly in the middle but with no prominent veins, up to 4" (10 cm) wide and 12" (30 cm) long, elliptic, tapered to a distinct petiole with a sheath 1-2.4" (2.5-6 cm) long at the base. Sheaths are maroon or green. Leaves appear in very early spring, dying and disappearing by early summer. Scape solid, smooth, round, hairless, straight, reddish to dull green, 7-16" (18 40 cm) tall and 3-4 mm thick, emerging as or after the leaves die. Umbel of 14-50, spherical, 1-1.5" (25 38 mm) across Flowers (early to mid summer) bell-like, 4-7 mm long, white, none forming bulblets. Capsule bulging, open to reveal shiny, round, black seeds in late summer. CONFUSING PLANTS: False hellebores (p. 674) tend to have much broader leaves. V. parviflorum and perhaps other species in the young stage may have narrower, ramp-like leaves, but they have numerous depressed veins and folds or ridges, which ramps lack. Clintonia (p. 268) leaves are much thicker and tougher and not ephemeral. Both of these lack the onion odor. SPECIES: The narrow-leaved ramp A. burdickii has narrower leaves that always have green petioles, while those of A. tricoccum are usually (not always, as some people claim) red. The narrow- leaved ramp has a milder flavor and flowers about a month earlier-the flow- ering stem is well developed (although unopened) before the leaves die back. It seems to prefer more clayey soils, but the two are sometimes found together, and in such cases often hybridize, especially in the northern part of their range. The insistence by many that sheath/petiole color definitively distinguishes these spe- cies has led to great confusion; there are many clear distinctions which are not very "keyable." (Continued on the next page.) 233 