LINEAR, ENTIRE, ONION-SCENTED LEAVES
GROUP 16 LINEAR, ENTIRE, ONION-SCENTED LEAVES
Allium along with cultivated onion, leek, species garlic, can and occa- chive.
All of these plants are in the frequently genus escape and numerous non-native introduced
Although cultivated alliums feral, I have only included the three most common makes them one
sionally be Alliums found can growing be distinguished by their distinctive onion odor, which functioning. However,
species. to identify if your sense of smell is "wild onion," the
some species contrived for field guides are repetitive and confusing. Although there in
of the easiest can and be safest hard groups to tell from each other. Since most are just called is no danger
confounding names the various species, they do have slightly different culinary applications.
genus Allium family Alliaciae (formerly part of the greater lily family, Liliaceae)
DESCRIPTION: Perennials with layered bulbs and a radiating cluster of thin, white roots. Leaves linear,
hollow or not, hairless, with no prominent veins, all basal but sometimes wrapped around the stalk for some
distance. (When we speak of stem leaves on some species, we mean the sheath wraps far up the stalk before
the blade diverges from it.) Stalk (scape) single per bulb, erect, unbranched, leafless (or with leaves sheathing
it), hairless. Inflorescence a terminal umbel with thin, broad bracts beneath it, enveloping the whole umbel in
a balloon-like sac before it opens. Flowers have 6 tepals arranged in 2 layers that are similar in size and color,
with 6 stamens and a single pistil. In some species some or all of the flowers may be replaced by bulblets.
Fruit a 3-lobed capsule containing 3 black seeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Onions have a superficial resemblance to a number of other monocot plants, some
of which are toxic. Death camas (p. 665) has a leaf or two on the stem, and its flowers are in racemes. Star-
of-Bethlehem (p. 666), has mucilaginous leaves, flowers in a raceme, and green leaf bases extending through
the center of the bulb. Atamasco lily Zephyranthes atamasca has broader, thicker, blunt leaves with many more
per rosette; the flowers are large and showy and grow singly. All of these toxic look-similars lack the allium
scent, which is a good distinguishing feature, but where they grow beside wild onions the smell from broken
alliums can confuse the nose of the gatherer.
FOOD USE: All parts of these alliums are edible: the bulbs, leaves, scapes, buds, and flowers. They can be
used as seasoning vegetables just like their cultivated relatives. In the species accounts I do not list food uses
that are possible but seem largely impractical.
CONSERVATION NOTE: All onions are perennials and potentially long-lived. When harvesting native
three clump-forming onion, be sure to leave behind at least two intact, healthy bulbs from each clump of any 6
leave at healthy least bulbs from clumps of 6-20, or 5 healthy bulbs from clumps over 20. For non-clumping or less,
3 bulbs within a hand-spread from any bulb you collect. Greens should also be collected sparingly. species
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO THE GENUS ALLIUM
The key is not your final answer!
or
Leaves flat, 1-3,5" (2.5-9 cm) wide.
leaves round, tubular,
1. Ramp
or
Bublets present in umbel; underground bulbs oblong to spherical.
No bulblets in umbel; underground bulbs long and narrow.
2. Field garlic
or
Leaves Leaves deeply folded at the base, with a rough keel below, to 1,2" (3 cm) wide.
3. Chive
Flowering spring to early summer.
flat, angled, or channeled; not tubular and less than 1 cm wide.
4. Feral garlic
or
Bulblets Bulblets not often present in umbel; 2 leaves diverge several inches up the stem.
present in umbel; all leaves basal.
Flowers white; bulb with a thick fibrous sheath.
5, American garlic
Flowering late summer to fall.
Flowers pink or white; bulb with a thinner fibrous sheath.
6, Textile onion
Flowers white to faint pink, scape nodding in bloom.
7. Prairle onion
Flowers pink, scape erect in bloom.
8. Nodding onion
232
9, Tall pink onion
LINEAR, ENTIRE, ONION-SCENTED LEAVES GROUP 16 LINEAR, ENTIRE, ONION-SCENTED LEAVES Allium along with cultivated onion, leek, species garlic, can and occa- chive. All of these plants are in the frequently genus escape and numerous non-native introduced Although cultivated alliums feral, I have only included the three most common makes them one sionally be Alliums found can growing be distinguished by their distinctive onion odor, which functioning. However, species. to identify if your sense of smell is "wild onion," the some species contrived for field guides are repetitive and confusing. Although there in of the easiest can and be safest hard groups to tell from each other. Since most are just called is no danger confounding names the various species, they do have slightly different culinary applications. genus Allium family Alliaciae (formerly part of the greater lily family, Liliaceae) DESCRIPTION: Perennials with layered bulbs and a radiating cluster of thin, white roots. Leaves linear, hollow or not, hairless, with no prominent veins, all basal but sometimes wrapped around the stalk for some distance. (When we speak of stem leaves on some species, we mean the sheath wraps far up the stalk before the blade diverges from it.) Stalk (scape) single per bulb, erect, unbranched, leafless (or with leaves sheathing it), hairless. Inflorescence a terminal umbel with thin, broad bracts beneath it, enveloping the whole umbel in a balloon-like sac before it opens. Flowers have 6 tepals arranged in 2 layers that are similar in size and color, with 6 stamens and a single pistil. In some species some or all of the flowers may be replaced by bulblets. Fruit a 3-lobed capsule containing 3 black seeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: Onions have a superficial resemblance to a number of other monocot plants, some of which are toxic. Death camas (p. 665) has a leaf or two on the stem, and its flowers are in racemes. Star- of-Bethlehem (p. 666), has mucilaginous leaves, flowers in a raceme, and green leaf bases extending through the center of the bulb. Atamasco lily Zephyranthes atamasca has broader, thicker, blunt leaves with many more per rosette; the flowers are large and showy and grow singly. All of these toxic look-similars lack the allium scent, which is a good distinguishing feature, but where they grow beside wild onions the smell from broken alliums can confuse the nose of the gatherer. FOOD USE: All parts of these alliums are edible: the bulbs, leaves, scapes, buds, and flowers. They can be used as seasoning vegetables just like their cultivated relatives. In the species accounts I do not list food uses that are possible but seem largely impractical. CONSERVATION NOTE: All onions are perennials and potentially long-lived. When harvesting native three clump-forming onion, be sure to leave behind at least two intact, healthy bulbs from each clump of any 6 leave at healthy least bulbs from clumps of 6-20, or 5 healthy bulbs from clumps over 20. For non-clumping or less, 3 bulbs within a hand-spread from any bulb you collect. Greens should also be collected sparingly. species TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO THE GENUS ALLIUM The key is not your final answer! or Leaves flat, 1-3,5" (2.5-9 cm) wide. leaves round, tubular, 1. Ramp or Bublets present in umbel; underground bulbs oblong to spherical. No bulblets in umbel; underground bulbs long and narrow. 2. Field garlic or Leaves Leaves deeply folded at the base, with a rough keel below, to 1,2" (3 cm) wide. 3. Chive Flowering spring to early summer. flat, angled, or channeled; not tubular and less than 1 cm wide. 4. Feral garlic or Bulblets Bulblets not often present in umbel; 2 leaves diverge several inches up the stem. present in umbel; all leaves basal. Flowers white; bulb with a thick fibrous sheath. 5, American garlic Flowering late summer to fall. Flowers pink or white; bulb with a thinner fibrous sheath. 6, Textile onion Flowers white to faint pink, scape nodding in bloom. 7. Prairle onion Flowers pink, scape erect in bloom. 8. Nodding onion 232 9, Tall pink onion 