16
bitternut USE: hickory. Gather bulbs preferentially from late spring better through before fully early grown; by the time the quality the salad, bulbs and reach many full
HABITAT: Hardwood and elm. forests In southern and high parts of its range it prefers north summer; later
1 Ramp (continued) floodplains with rich soil, especially slopes. those Native. dominated by deteriorates. sugar maple,
Greens FOOD are available have only passed in spring their prime. and are Ramps much are excellent as a in seasoning; soup, stir bulbs fry, casserole, can be pickled, canned, has or
other size, the dishes. leaves tender The leaves parts, including can be dried scapes, and crumbled flower buds, for and use green pods, are edible. Narrow-leaved ramp
a milder flavor. wild onion, this species is collected commercially, who overcollect sold at
dried. Any Conservation 3/2 (see note before key).
COMMENTS: Considered by many to restaurants. be our best There are some unscrupulous harvesters Although people
farmer's markets, is also and a served deal in of fine unnecessary ramp-shaming online and to harvest in the media. the bulbs, these some claims are
claim that the plant is one endangered, ill-conceived or anti-foraging paper reporting on research localized. In fact, to populations have
these. There great that it is always irresponsible designed underrepresent
been the plant's generally reproductive increasing nationwide for about a century, and these species faring
based primarily upon potential. Ramp conservation problems are highly are far better than most of
our native onions. It is entirely possible to
harvest ramp bulbs or leaves sustainably
and ethically. AKA wild leek, but that name
is also used for feral leeks.
Ramp seedheads in fall.
Allium burdickii. Note the green scapes, fully elongated while the
leaves are still green.
2
Field garlic
2
2
LI IWE-121
Allium vineale , family Alliaciae
the QUIC stem, CHECK Orion with hollow, rounded leaves; a leaf often sheathing the base of
umbel with bulblets, most germinating on the plant. ID difficulty 1.
plants DESCRIPTION: often form Winter dense, perennial, the tops dormant from early summer to
plants form clusters to 1.3" grass-like clumps where bulblet-heads have fallen. early fall. Small
and "daughter" bulbs on the side. (33 Clusters mm) long contain and 3 almost kinds of as bulbs: wide, with one or more Bulbs offset of older or
234 can remain dormant for years; large offsets, which form small new plants offsets, beside which the are mother wrapped bulb; in thick and sheaths central
16 bitternut USE: hickory. Gather bulbs preferentially from late spring better through before fully early grown; by the time the quality the salad, bulbs and reach many full HABITAT: Hardwood and elm. forests In southern and high parts of its range it prefers north summer; later 1 Ramp (continued) floodplains with rich soil, especially slopes. those Native. dominated by deteriorates. sugar maple, Greens FOOD are available have only passed in spring their prime. and are Ramps much are excellent as a in seasoning; soup, stir bulbs fry, casserole, can be pickled, canned, has or other size, the dishes. leaves tender The leaves parts, including can be dried scapes, and crumbled flower buds, for and use green pods, are edible. Narrow-leaved ramp a milder flavor. wild onion, this species is collected commercially, who overcollect sold at dried. Any Conservation 3/2 (see note before key). COMMENTS: Considered by many to restaurants. be our best There are some unscrupulous harvesters Although people farmer's markets, is also and a served deal in of fine unnecessary ramp-shaming online and to harvest in the media. the bulbs, these some claims are claim that the plant is one endangered, ill-conceived or anti-foraging paper reporting on research localized. In fact, to populations have these. There great that it is always irresponsible designed underrepresent been the plant's generally reproductive increasing nationwide for about a century, and these species faring based primarily upon potential. Ramp conservation problems are highly are far better than most of our native onions. It is entirely possible to harvest ramp bulbs or leaves sustainably and ethically. AKA wild leek, but that name is also used for feral leeks. Ramp seedheads in fall. Allium burdickii. Note the green scapes, fully elongated while the leaves are still green. 2 Field garlic 2 2 LI IWE-121 Allium vineale , family Alliaciae the QUIC stem, CHECK Orion with hollow, rounded leaves; a leaf often sheathing the base of umbel with bulblets, most germinating on the plant. ID difficulty 1. plants DESCRIPTION: often form Winter dense, perennial, the tops dormant from early summer to plants form clusters to 1.3" grass-like clumps where bulblet-heads have fallen. early fall. Small and "daughter" bulbs on the side. (33 Clusters mm) long contain and 3 almost kinds of as bulbs: wide, with one or more Bulbs offset of older or 234 can remain dormant for years; large offsets, which form small new plants offsets, beside which the are mother wrapped bulb; in thick and sheaths central 