LINEAR, ENTIRE, ONION-SCENTED LEAVES
bulbs, the lower which part regenerate of the stem, the existing plant. Young plants have a single bulb. Leaves
tubular (but often separated by 2-5" (5-13 cm), each leaf sheathing these above 4 Blade and
hollow, leaves have still channeled), up to 34" (86 cm) long but often muc shorter '
oung may twisting, curly tops, which are much thinner and tougher than Allium especially anadence in awas
I he lowest leaf withers long before the upper, and the tips turn dry and brown by Howering The leaves
leaf is erect, diverging slightly from the flower scape and usually a bit taller Scapes to 30 (77 my uppermost 'all The
flower cluster bud is long and narrow, not inflated, and maroon at the base. Umbel may have up in small,
densely packed purple flowers in late spring-but mostly it bears bulblets instead, which are about the 70 sizent
a grain of wheat and will sprout leaves while still attached. The weight of the growing bulblets maxes he stem
lean down to the ground.
HABITAT: Open or semi-open areas with a history of soil disturbance: old fields, roadsides. lawes, Darks,
empty lots. Most often in urban areas or near agriculture. Introduced. I
FOOD USE: Bulbs are available from late spring through summer. The central bulbs are best. hard offsets
are hardly worth your time. Once the tops have died back it becomes harder to find them. 50 early summ
a good time to gather them. Young leaves can be used like chives or scallions but are tougher than our name
onions; gather them from late winter through spring. Older, tough leaves can still be bundled and polled
their flavor in soup stock, then removed. (Continued on the next page.)
Curly winter eares
235
LINEAR, ENTIRE, ONION-SCENTED LEAVES bulbs, the lower which part regenerate of the stem, the existing plant. Young plants have a single bulb. Leaves tubular (but often separated by 2-5" (5-13 cm), each leaf sheathing these above 4 Blade and hollow, leaves have still channeled), up to 34" (86 cm) long but often muc shorter ' oung may twisting, curly tops, which are much thinner and tougher than Allium especially anadence in awas I he lowest leaf withers long before the upper, and the tips turn dry and brown by Howering The leaves leaf is erect, diverging slightly from the flower scape and usually a bit taller Scapes to 30 (77 my uppermost 'all The flower cluster bud is long and narrow, not inflated, and maroon at the base. Umbel may have up in small, densely packed purple flowers in late spring-but mostly it bears bulblets instead, which are about the 70 sizent a grain of wheat and will sprout leaves while still attached. The weight of the growing bulblets maxes he stem lean down to the ground. HABITAT: Open or semi-open areas with a history of soil disturbance: old fields, roadsides. lawes, Darks, empty lots. Most often in urban areas or near agriculture. Introduced. I FOOD USE: Bulbs are available from late spring through summer. The central bulbs are best. hard offsets are hardly worth your time. Once the tops have died back it becomes harder to find them. 50 early summ a good time to gather them. Young leaves can be used like chives or scallions but are tougher than our name onions; gather them from late winter through spring. Older, tough leaves can still be bundled and polled their flavor in soup stock, then removed. (Continued on the next page.) Curly winter eares 235 