LINEAR, ENTIRE, ONION-SCENTED LEAVES
4
Feral garlic
3
2
3
Allium sativum
family
Alliaciae
QUICK CHECK: Leaves deeply folded near the base, clasping and layered in the termer
third of the stem. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: found in dense This is a smaller version of cultivated garlic, but wild plants
on genetics of origin). Bulbs usually long and narrow, gently tapered to depending a
the clumps, so the bulbs flower and divide less frequently (also are usually
thickened base, but mature ones ready to flower will be enlarged and nearly spherical. scarcely
Bulbs are covered with a papery sheath, purplish except for the very bottom. Offsets
tiny with one or more flat sides, but in crowded wild clumps are infrequently produced. are Leaves
rising 14-28" (36-70 cm), fully clasping the lower stem or leaf cluster for 3-9" (8-23 cm) with 3 a 4 long, per plant,
green sheath before becoming free. Blades are folded into a V in cross section (more so when young), with pale- -1
small, sharp, rough keel on the bottom and a tiny hood at the tip. They are up to 1.2" (3 cm) wide. faintly glau
cous, the tips drooping with maturity. Margins roughened by tiny membranous teeth (usually not visible without
magnification, but you can feel them). Scapes solid, to 32" (80 cm) tall and 4-8 mm thick. Umbel (May-Day)
spherical with numerous pedicels, mostly bearing bulblets with a long beak. Beneath the umbel IS a single
bract with a long beak. Flowers bell-shaped, greenish-white to pink, 3-4 mm long; these generally do not pen
into fruits-instead forming bulblets.
HABITAT: Disturbed and usually forested areas with rich, moist soil, especially on roadsides and around ,15,
homesteads. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Bulbs like cultivated gar :
Since fewer offsets (cloves) are produced
in wild populations, don't forget that you
can use the young greens and scapes
This has the strongest, hottest flavor of
any of our wild onions.
COMMENTS: At a glance, you might pass
these over as just another clump of dat-
fodils or daylilies, with which they often
grow. The growth pattern suggests that
the clumps are very long-lived, and garlic
has spread and gone truly feral in many
areas, yet I have never seen it become
invasive.
237
LINEAR, ENTIRE, ONION-SCENTED LEAVES 4 Feral garlic 3 2 3 Allium sativum family Alliaciae QUICK CHECK: Leaves deeply folded near the base, clasping and layered in the termer third of the stem. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: found in dense This is a smaller version of cultivated garlic, but wild plants on genetics of origin). Bulbs usually long and narrow, gently tapered to depending a the clumps, so the bulbs flower and divide less frequently (also are usually thickened base, but mature ones ready to flower will be enlarged and nearly spherical. scarcely Bulbs are covered with a papery sheath, purplish except for the very bottom. Offsets tiny with one or more flat sides, but in crowded wild clumps are infrequently produced. are Leaves rising 14-28" (36-70 cm), fully clasping the lower stem or leaf cluster for 3-9" (8-23 cm) with 3 a 4 long, per plant, green sheath before becoming free. Blades are folded into a V in cross section (more so when young), with pale- -1 small, sharp, rough keel on the bottom and a tiny hood at the tip. They are up to 1.2" (3 cm) wide. faintly glau cous, the tips drooping with maturity. Margins roughened by tiny membranous teeth (usually not visible without magnification, but you can feel them). Scapes solid, to 32" (80 cm) tall and 4-8 mm thick. Umbel (May-Day) spherical with numerous pedicels, mostly bearing bulblets with a long beak. Beneath the umbel IS a single bract with a long beak. Flowers bell-shaped, greenish-white to pink, 3-4 mm long; these generally do not pen into fruits-instead forming bulblets. HABITAT: Disturbed and usually forested areas with rich, moist soil, especially on roadsides and around ,15, homesteads. Introduced. FOOD USE: Bulbs like cultivated gar : Since fewer offsets (cloves) are produced in wild populations, don't forget that you can use the young greens and scapes This has the strongest, hottest flavor of any of our wild onions. COMMENTS: At a glance, you might pass these over as just another clump of dat- fodils or daylilies, with which they often grow. The growth pattern suggests that the clumps are very long-lived, and garlic has spread and gone truly feral in many areas, yet I have never seen it become invasive. 237 