16
2
Field garlic (continued)
This
is
probably
COMMENTS: the Allium most readily available
to the greatest number of people in
North America, since il is remark-
ably abundant in the lawns and
parks of many urban areas, as well
as being a pervasive agricultural
weed in many regions. Since it is
non-native and weedy, harvest to
your heart's content.
Allium vineale, grasslike clump.
Chive
2
3
3
3
Allium schoenophrasum
family
Alliaciae
QUICK CHECK: Densely clumped, very narrow, erect stems and tightly packed umbels.
ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Densely clustered onion. Bulbs long and narrow, covered by a papery
coating, typically bearing 3 leaves each. Leaves erect at first but often leaning with age,
hollow, round in cross section, 10-24" (25-60 cm) tall and very narrow (2-4 mm wide).
Leaves completely encircle the scape for 4-5" (10-13 cm) at the base, then split open to
allow the stem through; above this they form a tube again and have a thin membrane
blocking off entry to their inside. Scapes erect to leaning, hollow, rounded, smooth, green, 10-22" (25-56 cm)
tall. Each scape has a large leaf almost equal to its height, a smaller leaf, and a third leaf soon withering at
the base. Umbel compact, spherical, about 1.2" (3 cm) wide, with numerous flowers on pedicels 5-10 mm, the
scape turned toward one side but not nodding. Flowers (early to mid summer) 12-14 mm long, the tepals not
spreading (bell-like), light purple with a darker purple central vein, the tips curved outward with a tiny, sharp
point. Flowers are not replaced by bulblets.
HABITAT: Rocky river banks and shoreline outcrops; open, moist, rocky ground. Garden escapes persist in sunny
spots around old homesteads and often spread to roadsides. Native, but with many introduced populations.
FOOD USE: Bulbs can be eaten at any time, but they're best when the tops are dormant. Gather tender
leaves from spring through early summer and use as a seasoning exactly as cultivated chives. A new flush of
good leaves is produced again in fall. Flowers make a nice garnish or addition to salads. Conservation 3, 2, 1
COMMENTS: Wild chives are native and widespread in the boreal forest region of North America. Our native
chives are of the variety sibiricum, which is larger than the typical cultivated chive, and has leaves that are usu-
and ally shorter can be found than the scape. Cultivated chives are a different variety of the same species, originating in Asia,
as an occasional garden escape through much of the region south of the native chive's range,
236
16 2 Field garlic (continued) This is probably COMMENTS: the Allium most readily available to the greatest number of people in North America, since il is remark- ably abundant in the lawns and parks of many urban areas, as well as being a pervasive agricultural weed in many regions. Since it is non-native and weedy, harvest to your heart's content. Allium vineale, grasslike clump. Chive 2 3 3 3 Allium schoenophrasum family Alliaciae QUICK CHECK: Densely clumped, very narrow, erect stems and tightly packed umbels. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Densely clustered onion. Bulbs long and narrow, covered by a papery coating, typically bearing 3 leaves each. Leaves erect at first but often leaning with age, hollow, round in cross section, 10-24" (25-60 cm) tall and very narrow (2-4 mm wide). Leaves completely encircle the scape for 4-5" (10-13 cm) at the base, then split open to allow the stem through; above this they form a tube again and have a thin membrane blocking off entry to their inside. Scapes erect to leaning, hollow, rounded, smooth, green, 10-22" (25-56 cm) tall. Each scape has a large leaf almost equal to its height, a smaller leaf, and a third leaf soon withering at the base. Umbel compact, spherical, about 1.2" (3 cm) wide, with numerous flowers on pedicels 5-10 mm, the scape turned toward one side but not nodding. Flowers (early to mid summer) 12-14 mm long, the tepals not spreading (bell-like), light purple with a darker purple central vein, the tips curved outward with a tiny, sharp point. Flowers are not replaced by bulblets. HABITAT: Rocky river banks and shoreline outcrops; open, moist, rocky ground. Garden escapes persist in sunny spots around old homesteads and often spread to roadsides. Native, but with many introduced populations. FOOD USE: Bulbs can be eaten at any time, but they're best when the tops are dormant. Gather tender leaves from spring through early summer and use as a seasoning exactly as cultivated chives. A new flush of good leaves is produced again in fall. Flowers make a nice garnish or addition to salads. Conservation 3, 2, 1 COMMENTS: Wild chives are native and widespread in the boreal forest region of North America. Our native chives are of the variety sibiricum, which is larger than the typical cultivated chive, and has leaves that are usu- and ally shorter can be found than the scape. Cultivated chives are a different variety of the same species, originating in Asia, as an occasional garden escape through much of the region south of the native chive's range, 236 