LINEAR, ENTIRE, ONION-SCENTED LEAVES
American garlic
3
3
5
Allium canadense . family Alliaciae
QUICK CHECK: Narrow hanneled leaves, not hollow, clasping the lower scape; umbel
with bulblets and 01 flowers. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Spring ephemeral sometimes forming lawn-like carpets. Bulbs single,
stout, broadly egg to teardrop-shaped, 0.3-0.8" (8-20 mm) long, symmetrical, not pro-
ducing offsets Leaves solid, 2-5 mm wide, to 20" (50 cm) tall, gently U-shaped in cross
section. becoming flatter toward the tip, often with a faint off-center keel below. Young leaves are limp and
weakly erect with a pointed tip. With maturity they taper to an extremely thin tip, which is often wilted even
before blooming. Each flowering plant has 3 leaves sheathing the stem for 2-8" (5-20 cm), the top 2 often
nearly paired where diverging. Scapes 18-32" (46-80 cm)
tall, erect, pithy inside, not nodding in bloom. Umbel usually
Umbel with bulblets.
has a cluster of several tightly-packed, sessile, blunt-pointed
bulblets 5-11 mm long, along with a few flowers on pedicels
0.3-1.2" (8-30 mm) long. In some areas, however, plants with
all flowers and no bulblets predominate. Flowers white to pink,
usually with a purple stripe down the center of each tepal,
blooming in late spring. Seeds rarely produced, triangular.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Field garlic has hollow leaves. False
garlic (p. 259) has fewer and much larger flowers, and mostly
lacks the onion scent.
HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in forests, open woodlands, for-
est edges, clearings, meadows. Tolerates more shade than
nodding and prairie onion. Native.
FOOD USE: in summer, dig up the shallow bulbs-if you can
remember where they are. Use the greens as a seasoning in
early to mid spring, like mild chives or scallions. The bulblets
can also be collected in mid to late summer-use some and
plant some. Conservation 3/2/2.
COMMENTS: This native onion is still abundant in many rich
woods and meadows, but in many places the non-native and
culinarily inferior A. vineale is outcompeting it.
Dormant bulbs.
Harvested plants just before blooming
Early spring leaves.
238
LINEAR, ENTIRE, ONION-SCENTED LEAVES American garlic 3 3 5 Allium canadense . family Alliaciae QUICK CHECK: Narrow hanneled leaves, not hollow, clasping the lower scape; umbel with bulblets and 01 flowers. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Spring ephemeral sometimes forming lawn-like carpets. Bulbs single, stout, broadly egg to teardrop-shaped, 0.3-0.8" (8-20 mm) long, symmetrical, not pro- ducing offsets Leaves solid, 2-5 mm wide, to 20" (50 cm) tall, gently U-shaped in cross section. becoming flatter toward the tip, often with a faint off-center keel below. Young leaves are limp and weakly erect with a pointed tip. With maturity they taper to an extremely thin tip, which is often wilted even before blooming. Each flowering plant has 3 leaves sheathing the stem for 2-8" (5-20 cm), the top 2 often nearly paired where diverging. Scapes 18-32" (46-80 cm) tall, erect, pithy inside, not nodding in bloom. Umbel usually Umbel with bulblets. has a cluster of several tightly-packed, sessile, blunt-pointed bulblets 5-11 mm long, along with a few flowers on pedicels 0.3-1.2" (8-30 mm) long. In some areas, however, plants with all flowers and no bulblets predominate. Flowers white to pink, usually with a purple stripe down the center of each tepal, blooming in late spring. Seeds rarely produced, triangular. CONFUSING PLANTS: Field garlic has hollow leaves. False garlic (p. 259) has fewer and much larger flowers, and mostly lacks the onion scent. HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in forests, open woodlands, for- est edges, clearings, meadows. Tolerates more shade than nodding and prairie onion. Native. FOOD USE: in summer, dig up the shallow bulbs-if you can remember where they are. Use the greens as a seasoning in early to mid spring, like mild chives or scallions. The bulblets can also be collected in mid to late summer-use some and plant some. Conservation 3/2/2. COMMENTS: This native onion is still abundant in many rich woods and meadows, but in many places the non-native and culinarily inferior A. vineale is outcompeting it. Dormant bulbs. Harvested plants just before blooming Early spring leaves. 238 