lliaciae
LINEAR, ENTIRE, ONION-SCENTED LEAVES
pink or white flowers spring
HABITAT: Likes full sun and
rich soil in meadows, open
Tiped Bulb
woods, roadsides, lightly used
pastures, rocky outcrops, and
4-12' 8-13mm 'me
savannahs. Mostly in dry soil,
ut occasionally in moist prai-
*Prtipped the channeled the pedicels with center in à Scape shape single Bulblets prominer: but usually 103-3010 the single
ries, even marsh and fen edges.
Native.
FOOD USE: Bulbs are best
when the top is mostly dormant.
Leaves have a long season of
HABITAT:
availability, as they are not
ephemeral. Conservation 3, 2.
COMMENTS: This species
FOOD USE
grows much larger, on aver-
age, in the eastern states than
it does in the Rocky Mountains,
but it is less common. Under
ideal conditions the bulbs can
grow quite large, but usually
they are small. The flavor of all
parts in mild.
Related edible:
9 Tall pink onion
Allium stellatum
2
2
QUICK CHECK: Leaves solid; pink flowers blooming late summer to fall, no bulblets.
ID difficulty 1.
This species is
very similar to
nodding onion
but lightly
smaller, reach
ing 12-20" (30-
5° cm). Bulbs somewhat plumper
than those of nodding onton and
have a papery sheath. Leaves
liaciae Quick
angular near the base, sometimes
with d shallow groove in the center
distally they are shallowly U-enah
neted Flowers (mid summer total
to ID difficulty 2.
nght pink-purple and borne ID 111
evect duster (although the cluster
DESCRIPTION: Bulbssings
rods before the flowers open). surry tal
union
is
found
in
dry.
in
savannahs,
time
as
Oak
sell stades and sandy prairies
tall
prairie
onion.
serera
lliaciae LINEAR, ENTIRE, ONION-SCENTED LEAVES pink or white flowers spring HABITAT: Likes full sun and rich soil in meadows, open Tiped Bulb woods, roadsides, lightly used pastures, rocky outcrops, and 4-12' 8-13mm 'me savannahs. Mostly in dry soil, ut occasionally in moist prai- *Prtipped the channeled the pedicels with center in à Scape shape single Bulblets prominer: but usually 103-3010 the single ries, even marsh and fen edges. Native. FOOD USE: Bulbs are best when the top is mostly dormant. Leaves have a long season of HABITAT: availability, as they are not ephemeral. Conservation 3, 2. COMMENTS: This species FOOD USE grows much larger, on aver- age, in the eastern states than it does in the Rocky Mountains, but it is less common. Under ideal conditions the bulbs can grow quite large, but usually they are small. The flavor of all parts in mild. Related edible: 9 Tall pink onion Allium stellatum 2 2 QUICK CHECK: Leaves solid; pink flowers blooming late summer to fall, no bulblets. ID difficulty 1. This species is very similar to nodding onion but lightly smaller, reach ing 12-20" (30- 5° cm). Bulbs somewhat plumper than those of nodding onton and have a papery sheath. Leaves liaciae Quick angular near the base, sometimes with d shallow groove in the center distally they are shallowly U-enah neted Flowers (mid summer total to ID difficulty 2. nght pink-purple and borne ID 111 evect duster (although the cluster DESCRIPTION: Bulbssings rods before the flowers open). surry tal union is found in dry. in savannahs, time as Oak sell stades and sandy prairies tall prairie onion. serera 