mm
0
1cm
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
Prairie false dandelion
2
2
2
Nothocalais cuspidata
2
Asteraceae
(Composite
family)
yellow flowers on a short, naked stem. ID difficulty 2.
UICK CHECK: Basal rosette of grass-like leaves with a white midvein; dandelion like
DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Root large and thick, often flattened or irregular in cross
tion, sometimes multi-crowned, narrowed at the top. Flesh is light, slightly opaque, sec-
brittle, and tender. Basal rosette radiating with numerous linear leaves 4-6" (10-15 very cm)
long. Leaves gently tapered to a narrow white base, V-folded, with a pointed tip and wavy
margins. The midvein is broad and nearly white but not depressed above; it is rounded below.
Secondary veins are parallel. The blades are glossy, but the margins have
much fine, soft, long hair. Sap milky but not profuse. Scapes 6-8" (15-20 cm)
tall, thin, hollow, woolly, twisted, lined and finely ribbed lengthwise, each
bearing a single flower head. Heads yellow, 1.2-2" (3-5 across. The bracts
are lanceolate, withering, yellow-green, often with a dark central stripe, the
tips acuminate and brown. Rays yellow and truncated, the tip with 5 lobes,
the center of each outer ray purple-brown near the bottom. Seed (achene)
bullet-shaped with a white pappus. The plant blooms in mid to late spring,
often producing multiple scapes in succession.
HABITAT: Medium to dry prairie in full sun, especially where sloped and
sandy or rocky. Native.
FOOD USE: Roots are hard to dig up, but large and tender. They are slightly
bitter raw, but milder after being steamed or boiled. Young leaves, flowers,
and flower stalks can be eaten raw or cooked. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: This attractive prairie plant is still rather common in some
areas, as it thrives on soils too dry and poor for farming. It is in most ways
similar to dandelion, but the flavor is less bitter. The root is proportionately
large. The flowers smell like sunflowers.
2
Salsify
3
3
2
3
NG-471
genus Tragopogon
Asteraceae
(Composite
family)
QUICK CHECK: Long grass-like leaves, milky sap, and tall branching stems with
dandelion-like flowers. ID difficulty 2.
Biennials. Taproot thick, fleshy, light brown, rapidly tapered, usually cm) lacking long
DESCRIPTION: with milky sap. Rosette single. Basal leaves several, 7-12" hairless, (18-30 widest at
and major branches, to 0.6" mm) wide, without petioles, grass-like, deeply folded, 2 or 3-ranked. Margins
the base up and tapered (15 to a thin, sharp tip, arranged radially rather are entire than but sometimes wavy.
Composite range
Midveins light-colored and hollow,
depressed above and protruding below. below. Sec- all
slightly veins are light, parallel, flat above and cm) tall
ondary from the base. Stems 2.5-5 (75-150 roundish,
emanating 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm) thick, erect, straight, at maturity-
and with small hollow, hairless scattered
thick-walled and stems a of young plants have toward the
but leaves unattached wool, especially the lower
gobs of loose, Branches many but absent in erect.
inflorescence. third, simple or compound, strongly ascending to
(Continued on the next page.)
Salsify flower bud and pedunc le at the right stage
for eating (T. pratensis)
Salsify shoot at the right stage for peeling
243
(T. dubius).
mm 0 1cm LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED Prairie false dandelion 2 2 2 Nothocalais cuspidata 2 Asteraceae (Composite family) yellow flowers on a short, naked stem. ID difficulty 2. UICK CHECK: Basal rosette of grass-like leaves with a white midvein; dandelion like DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Root large and thick, often flattened or irregular in cross tion, sometimes multi-crowned, narrowed at the top. Flesh is light, slightly opaque, sec- brittle, and tender. Basal rosette radiating with numerous linear leaves 4-6" (10-15 very cm) long. Leaves gently tapered to a narrow white base, V-folded, with a pointed tip and wavy margins. The midvein is broad and nearly white but not depressed above; it is rounded below. Secondary veins are parallel. The blades are glossy, but the margins have much fine, soft, long hair. Sap milky but not profuse. Scapes 6-8" (15-20 cm) tall, thin, hollow, woolly, twisted, lined and finely ribbed lengthwise, each bearing a single flower head. Heads yellow, 1.2-2" (3-5 across. The bracts are lanceolate, withering, yellow-green, often with a dark central stripe, the tips acuminate and brown. Rays yellow and truncated, the tip with 5 lobes, the center of each outer ray purple-brown near the bottom. Seed (achene) bullet-shaped with a white pappus. The plant blooms in mid to late spring, often producing multiple scapes in succession. HABITAT: Medium to dry prairie in full sun, especially where sloped and sandy or rocky. Native. FOOD USE: Roots are hard to dig up, but large and tender. They are slightly bitter raw, but milder after being steamed or boiled. Young leaves, flowers, and flower stalks can be eaten raw or cooked. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: This attractive prairie plant is still rather common in some areas, as it thrives on soils too dry and poor for farming. It is in most ways similar to dandelion, but the flavor is less bitter. The root is proportionately large. The flowers smell like sunflowers. 2 Salsify 3 3 2 3 NG-471 genus Tragopogon Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK CHECK: Long grass-like leaves, milky sap, and tall branching stems with dandelion-like flowers. ID difficulty 2. Biennials. Taproot thick, fleshy, light brown, rapidly tapered, usually cm) lacking long DESCRIPTION: with milky sap. Rosette single. Basal leaves several, 7-12" hairless, (18-30 widest at and major branches, to 0.6" mm) wide, without petioles, grass-like, deeply folded, 2 or 3-ranked. Margins the base up and tapered (15 to a thin, sharp tip, arranged radially rather are entire than but sometimes wavy. Composite range Midveins light-colored and hollow, depressed above and protruding below. below. Sec- all slightly veins are light, parallel, flat above and cm) tall ondary from the base. Stems 2.5-5 (75-150 roundish, emanating 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm) thick, erect, straight, at maturity- and with small hollow, hairless scattered thick-walled and stems a of young plants have toward the but leaves unattached wool, especially the lower gobs of loose, Branches many but absent in erect. inflorescence. third, simple or compound, strongly ascending to (Continued on the next page.) Salsify flower bud and pedunc le at the right stage for eating (T. pratensis) Salsify shoot at the right stage for peeling 243 (T. dubius). 