mm
1cm
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
Spiderwort
2
2
2
genus Tradescantia
family
Commelinaceae
QUICK flowers CHECK: Thick, succulent, grass-like leaves with slimy sap, 7 ininted stem. and
ple with 3 petals. ID difficulty 1.
GENUS thickened DESCRIPTION: Perennial herbs with grass-like leaves, the roots fibrous,
times and fleshy, the sap slimy, Stems single or clumped, simple or some-
erect to leaning, zigzag, up to 40" (1 m) tall and 0.6" (15 mm) thick, solid, roundish sparely in forking,
section, succulent and juicy (remaining moist even as the leaves wither), jointed. Leaves cross
sessile, 2-ranked, linear, narrow, entire, semi-succulent, deeply to slightly folded (at least near the
parallel veins, the margins entire. Stem leaves are alternate and clasp with a sheath. Inflorescence base), with
4-50, terminal or axillary, with one or two leaves beneath it. Only 1-3 flowers per cluster bloom at once. an umbel fac of
skyward; the spent flowers and unopened buds hang on limp pedicels. Flowers (late spring through summer) rg
are radially symmetrical, 0.7-1.4" (18-36 mm) across with 3, separate, ovate, green sepais. Petals 3, broadly
ovate, separate, alike in size (unlike dayflowers, where one is reduced), not constricted to a stalk-like base,
usually blue or purple but sometimes pink and rarely white. There are 6 stamens with thick blue-purple filaments
and yellow anthers, arising from a tuft of kinky blue threads around the single pistil. Fruit an egg-shaped, part
capsule 4-8 mm long, holding 3-6 seeds. Some species die back in early to mid summer as the soil desiccates
CONFUSING PLANTS: Resembles salsify but lacks latex. Told from grasses and sedges by its thick,
laginous sap. Dayflowers have a bract folded over the inflorescence and one smaller petal.
SPECIES: There are a dozen or so in our region, all edible.
HABITAT: Mostly open, sunny, dry locations. All species native.
FOOD USE: All tender parts are edible raw or cooked. The young leaves and hearts of young leaf clusters are
gathered in spring or early summer. Stems are good when young, but older stems, even late in the grow
season, can sometimes be eaten after peeling the tough rind. In summer you can pick the flowers and flower
buds. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: The texture is mucilaginous, but the flavor is
mild and pleasant. These highly attractive plants are great for
edible native landscaping, especially in dry sand.
torking
stems
245
Ohio This species spiderwort IS common T. ohiensis in dry, has sandy, two-ranked sunny basal soil This leaf clumps IS probably and hairless our best spiderwor for eating.
mm 1cm LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED Spiderwort 2 2 2 genus Tradescantia family Commelinaceae QUICK flowers CHECK: Thick, succulent, grass-like leaves with slimy sap, 7 ininted stem. and ple with 3 petals. ID difficulty 1. GENUS thickened DESCRIPTION: Perennial herbs with grass-like leaves, the roots fibrous, times and fleshy, the sap slimy, Stems single or clumped, simple or some- erect to leaning, zigzag, up to 40" (1 m) tall and 0.6" (15 mm) thick, solid, roundish sparely in forking, section, succulent and juicy (remaining moist even as the leaves wither), jointed. Leaves cross sessile, 2-ranked, linear, narrow, entire, semi-succulent, deeply to slightly folded (at least near the parallel veins, the margins entire. Stem leaves are alternate and clasp with a sheath. Inflorescence base), with 4-50, terminal or axillary, with one or two leaves beneath it. Only 1-3 flowers per cluster bloom at once. an umbel fac of skyward; the spent flowers and unopened buds hang on limp pedicels. Flowers (late spring through summer) rg are radially symmetrical, 0.7-1.4" (18-36 mm) across with 3, separate, ovate, green sepais. Petals 3, broadly ovate, separate, alike in size (unlike dayflowers, where one is reduced), not constricted to a stalk-like base, usually blue or purple but sometimes pink and rarely white. There are 6 stamens with thick blue-purple filaments and yellow anthers, arising from a tuft of kinky blue threads around the single pistil. Fruit an egg-shaped, part capsule 4-8 mm long, holding 3-6 seeds. Some species die back in early to mid summer as the soil desiccates CONFUSING PLANTS: Resembles salsify but lacks latex. Told from grasses and sedges by its thick, laginous sap. Dayflowers have a bract folded over the inflorescence and one smaller petal. SPECIES: There are a dozen or so in our region, all edible. HABITAT: Mostly open, sunny, dry locations. All species native. FOOD USE: All tender parts are edible raw or cooked. The young leaves and hearts of young leaf clusters are gathered in spring or early summer. Stems are good when young, but older stems, even late in the grow season, can sometimes be eaten after peeling the tough rind. In summer you can pick the flowers and flower buds. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: The texture is mucilaginous, but the flavor is mild and pleasant. These highly attractive plants are great for edible native landscaping, especially in dry sand. torking stems 245 Ohio This species spiderwort IS common T. ohiensis in dry, has sandy, two-ranked sunny basal soil This leaf clumps IS probably and hairless our best spiderwor for eating. 