LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
Salsify (continued)
Stem leaves alternate. numer-
ous and overlapping at first.
similar to the basal leaves but
shorter and clasping. broad at
the base abruptly narrowing to
a long tapered tip. Flowers
single composite heads 1.2-1.8"
(3-4.6 cm) across at the end of
a long peduncle, composed of
ray florets only; yellow or purple.
There are several long, pointed,
keeled bracts on the outside of
each head. After flowering this
ripens into the familiar "giant
dandelion" seedhead, with a
spherical cluster of long, thin,
seeds with a golden parachute
on the end (which looks white
from a distance).
SPECIES: There are 3, all intro-
duced, all excellent. T. dubius
has yellow flowerheads with an
inflated, hollow peduncle. The
rays are broader toward the tip
and the bracts are longer than
the rays. It prefers slightly drier soil. T pratensis has yellow flowerheads with a less inflated peduncle. The rays
are almost uniform in width, and longer than the bracts. This slightly smaller species is more common in moist
soils. T. porrifolius has purple flowers and rays tapered to the tip. It is locally common in rich disturbed soil.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Nonflowering plants may be hard to tell from grasses, sedges, or spiderworts (none
of which are poisonous) at a glance, but all of these have ranked rather than radiating rosettes, and none
produce latex. Spiderworts have slimy sap, and the stalks are fully solid.
HABITAT: Sunny open areas with ample moisture: roadsides, fields, open slopes, building sites, vacant lots.
Often near pavement edges, especially in semi-arid regions where it takes advantage of runoff. Not common
in pastures because livestock relish it. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Roots should be dug in fall or early spring from plants without stalks, and are best cooked. All
tender green parts are edible raw or cooked: upright leaves at the center of the cluster in spring, shoots in
late spring, and flower buds and their peduncles in summer.
COMMENTS: Salsify is one of our best vegetables: versatile with several delicious edible parts available
over much of the year. Certainly this plant would be more commonly eaten if it were not so hard to tell from
grasses and at a glance. In my opinion, young stalks harvested at just the right stage, peeled of their lower leaves
steamed until tender, are among the finest vegetables in existence.
dubing
I
244
porrifolios
T. pratensis.
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED Salsify (continued) Stem leaves alternate. numer- ous and overlapping at first. similar to the basal leaves but shorter and clasping. broad at the base abruptly narrowing to a long tapered tip. Flowers single composite heads 1.2-1.8" (3-4.6 cm) across at the end of a long peduncle, composed of ray florets only; yellow or purple. There are several long, pointed, keeled bracts on the outside of each head. After flowering this ripens into the familiar "giant dandelion" seedhead, with a spherical cluster of long, thin, seeds with a golden parachute on the end (which looks white from a distance). SPECIES: There are 3, all intro- duced, all excellent. T. dubius has yellow flowerheads with an inflated, hollow peduncle. The rays are broader toward the tip and the bracts are longer than the rays. It prefers slightly drier soil. T pratensis has yellow flowerheads with a less inflated peduncle. The rays are almost uniform in width, and longer than the bracts. This slightly smaller species is more common in moist soils. T. porrifolius has purple flowers and rays tapered to the tip. It is locally common in rich disturbed soil. CONFUSING PLANTS: Nonflowering plants may be hard to tell from grasses, sedges, or spiderworts (none of which are poisonous) at a glance, but all of these have ranked rather than radiating rosettes, and none produce latex. Spiderworts have slimy sap, and the stalks are fully solid. HABITAT: Sunny open areas with ample moisture: roadsides, fields, open slopes, building sites, vacant lots. Often near pavement edges, especially in semi-arid regions where it takes advantage of runoff. Not common in pastures because livestock relish it. Introduced. FOOD USE: Roots should be dug in fall or early spring from plants without stalks, and are best cooked. All tender green parts are edible raw or cooked: upright leaves at the center of the cluster in spring, shoots in late spring, and flower buds and their peduncles in summer. COMMENTS: Salsify is one of our best vegetables: versatile with several delicious edible parts available over much of the year. Certainly this plant would be more commonly eaten if it were not so hard to tell from grasses and at a glance. In my opinion, young stalks harvested at just the right stage, peeled of their lower leaves steamed until tender, are among the finest vegetables in existence. dubing I 244 porrifolios T. pratensis. 