LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
2
2
3
4
Day lily
2
Asphodelaceae
Hemerocallis CHECK: Dense colonies fulva of long, family difficulty narrow, 1. basal leaves; naked stems bearing bearing large
DESCRIPTION: orange QUICK flowers with Perennial 6 long tepals. forming ID dense colonies whitish to through tan tubers a mat to 1" of (2.5 rhizomes cm) to long, 40" each m)
with long a and tuft 1-1.4" (25-36 mm) wide, prominent the leaf veins. bundles Near the tip they are and broadly fully V-shaped, encircle the but inner near leaves. the base The they hol- tips
numerous of small, fibrous oblong, roots smooth, at its end. terminal, Leaves basal, in oblong 2-ranked in cross clumps section. of 5-7, Blades thick
of are and young deeply spongy, leaves folded, hairless, are with turned with thin, into no membranous a keel. Stems top edges 36-60" (and that then (90-150 often only overlap sparely), cm) tall, smooth, leafless with except glaucous, few to for several an round, occasional flowers. hairless, bract. Flow-
ers Inflorescence low, 3-4" unbranched (8-10 usually cm) except across, has ruffled in 2 the with major margins flowering 6 branches, tepals and that a each light are orange-red spike-like central stripe, or except raceme-like recurved for a one yellow when side open-which zone black at and the one base, lasts side the just orange. inner one
3 day. larger Stamens and veiny 6, with with long and curvy up to filaments, 3.5" (9 cm) the long. anthers Fruit long a leathery and narrow, 3-sided capsule that is rarely are questionable produced.
CONFUSING Flower buds cylindrical PLANTS: There are other species and hybrids of day lily, the safety of which
HABITAT: Full spreading from cultivation and often persisting after homes I disappeared.
(even more than sun this to one.) moderate shade in a wide variety of soils, but not have waterlogged or Most exceedingly common dry. in
old Introduced, fields, forest edges, abandoned home sites, or along roadsides.
be used as a vegetable-- recommend only using firm ones and cooking cooked. them. Flower The
FOOD USE: Tubers of the leaf can cluster in spring, and the shoots in early summer, can be eaten raw or and then
buds whitish and heart flowers gathered in summer and eaten cooked; petals are traditionally stored by drying
reconstituted for cooking.
COMMENTS: This is one of the best-known wild edibles, and it produces lots of food in a small area. Where
found it is often way too abundant, and you'd do the woods a favor by getting rid of some.
WARNING: Many people experience gastric discomfort after eating this plant-explosive diarrhea and
sometimes vomiting. For some people the flower buds cause an uncomfortable burning in the throat. Additional
serious symptoms have
been reported. Adverse
reactions are not rare.
Although much is written
in the foraging literature
about this plant, I no Jon-
ger allow people to eat it in
my foraging classes. Eat at
your own risk
246
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED 2 2 3 4 Day lily 2 Asphodelaceae Hemerocallis CHECK: Dense colonies fulva of long, family difficulty narrow, 1. basal leaves; naked stems bearing bearing large DESCRIPTION: orange QUICK flowers with Perennial 6 long tepals. forming ID dense colonies whitish to through tan tubers a mat to 1" of (2.5 rhizomes cm) to long, 40" each m) with long a and tuft 1-1.4" (25-36 mm) wide, prominent the leaf veins. bundles Near the tip they are and broadly fully V-shaped, encircle the but inner near leaves. the base The they hol- tips numerous of small, fibrous oblong, roots smooth, at its end. terminal, Leaves basal, in oblong 2-ranked in cross clumps section. of 5-7, Blades thick of are and young deeply spongy, leaves folded, hairless, are with turned with thin, into no membranous a keel. Stems top edges 36-60" (and that then (90-150 often only overlap sparely), cm) tall, smooth, leafless with except glaucous, few to for several an round, occasional flowers. hairless, bract. Flow- ers Inflorescence low, 3-4" unbranched (8-10 usually cm) except across, has ruffled in 2 the with major margins flowering 6 branches, tepals and that a each light are orange-red spike-like central stripe, or except raceme-like recurved for a one yellow when side open-which zone black at and the one base, lasts side the just orange. inner one 3 day. larger Stamens and veiny 6, with with long and curvy up to filaments, 3.5" (9 cm) the long. anthers Fruit long a leathery and narrow, 3-sided capsule that is rarely are questionable produced. CONFUSING Flower buds cylindrical PLANTS: There are other species and hybrids of day lily, the safety of which HABITAT: Full spreading from cultivation and often persisting after homes I disappeared. (even more than sun this to one.) moderate shade in a wide variety of soils, but not have waterlogged or Most exceedingly common dry. in old Introduced, fields, forest edges, abandoned home sites, or along roadsides. be used as a vegetable-- recommend only using firm ones and cooking cooked. them. Flower The FOOD USE: Tubers of the leaf can cluster in spring, and the shoots in early summer, can be eaten raw or and then buds whitish and heart flowers gathered in summer and eaten cooked; petals are traditionally stored by drying reconstituted for cooking. COMMENTS: This is one of the best-known wild edibles, and it produces lots of food in a small area. Where found it is often way too abundant, and you'd do the woods a favor by getting rid of some. WARNING: Many people experience gastric discomfort after eating this plant-explosive diarrhea and sometimes vomiting. For some people the flower buds cause an uncomfortable burning in the throat. Additional serious symptoms have been reported. Adverse reactions are not rare. Although much is written in the foraging literature about this plant, I no Jon- ger allow people to eat it in my foraging classes. Eat at your own risk 246 