mm
0
1cm
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
Chufa
2
2
[1]
Cyperus esculentus Cyperaceae (Sedge IWE-98 family)
QUICK whorl of CHECK: unequal Light leaves yellow-green, short sedge with a straight stalk
on top, and an unequal umbel of yellowish spikelets, hearing ID a difficulty 3preadino
DESCRIPTION: tened Perennial sedge spreading by tubers and seeds. Tubers 2.
end of or thread-thin asymmetric, hard, 0.2-0.7" (5-18 mm), light orange-brown, produced spherica to flat-
Rosette rhizomes 2-14" (5-36 cm) from the plant, up to 5" (13 cm) only at the
tuber. grows from a root crown at the surface fed by a vertical rhizome underground.
tight deeper 3-sided cluster. Basal leaves 3-ranked, the leaves at each position stacked connected and often to a
folded like Blades 10-28" (25-71 long, light green, not stalked narrowed maroon at the base.
Stem single, a paper airplane with 3 distinct angles including a V in the middle, or the upper at ones the oase. nairless.
abruptly straight, smooth, erect, 3-angled, 12-30" (30-76 cm) tall, each side shallowly nearly great
terminates in a wide-spreading clump of 3-9 leaves of varying lengths beneath the inflorescence concave. The stem
longest of these leaves is more than double the shortest, and extends beyond the spike branches. Inflorescence The
an umbel of 5-10 spikes at the end of very thin stems (rays), which vary dramatically in length from 5" (*15
to less than 0.5" (13 mm), the longer rays naked and smooth near the base. Some of the spikes are branched. cm)
Spikes have 12-50 flattened, yellow-brown spikelets up to 1.2" (3 cm) long radiating along their length. the
spikelets not touching each other at the base. Tiny curving filaments protrude from beneath the scales of
blooming spikelets. Fruit a tiny, 3-sided brown seed (achene).
CONFUSING PLANTS: Other sedges in the genus Cyperus-none are dangerous, but you can waste a lot of
time digging the wrong plants. C. strigosus, what I call "false chufa," has more crowded and pointed spikelets.
to verify your ID, dig and check for tubers.
HABITAT: River floodplains, sandbars, mudflats, banks, lakeshores, disturbed wet meadows. it spreads in
moist disturbed soil and agricultural fields and is often a common weed in clay-rich farmland. Native.
FOOD USE: From fall through spring, dig around the plants and pick out the tubers. They can be refrigerated
for long periods or dried. Traditionally dried (sometimes roasted) and ground into a flour or paste that is used
in breads or mixed with water to make a drink (horchata). You can put the fresh tubers in a blender with water.
then strain through a cloth to get a milky liquid for hot cereal or gravy. They are also dried and pressed for
oil (which I've purchased but never made.) Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This widespread plant was domesticated in Egypt where it has been eaten for tens of thousands
of years. It has also been an important cultivated food of the Owens Valley Paiute of California. Wild tubers
are smaller, sparser, and more fibrous than the cultivated form, but still very good. AKA yellow nutsedge
earth-almond.
247
mm 0 1cm LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED Chufa 2 2 [1] Cyperus esculentus Cyperaceae (Sedge IWE-98 family) QUICK whorl of CHECK: unequal Light leaves yellow-green, short sedge with a straight stalk on top, and an unequal umbel of yellowish spikelets, hearing ID a difficulty 3preadino DESCRIPTION: tened Perennial sedge spreading by tubers and seeds. Tubers 2. end of or thread-thin asymmetric, hard, 0.2-0.7" (5-18 mm), light orange-brown, produced spherica to flat- Rosette rhizomes 2-14" (5-36 cm) from the plant, up to 5" (13 cm) only at the tuber. grows from a root crown at the surface fed by a vertical rhizome underground. tight deeper 3-sided cluster. Basal leaves 3-ranked, the leaves at each position stacked connected and often to a folded like Blades 10-28" (25-71 long, light green, not stalked narrowed maroon at the base. Stem single, a paper airplane with 3 distinct angles including a V in the middle, or the upper at ones the oase. nairless. abruptly straight, smooth, erect, 3-angled, 12-30" (30-76 cm) tall, each side shallowly nearly great terminates in a wide-spreading clump of 3-9 leaves of varying lengths beneath the inflorescence concave. The stem longest of these leaves is more than double the shortest, and extends beyond the spike branches. Inflorescence The an umbel of 5-10 spikes at the end of very thin stems (rays), which vary dramatically in length from 5" (*15 to less than 0.5" (13 mm), the longer rays naked and smooth near the base. Some of the spikes are branched. cm) Spikes have 12-50 flattened, yellow-brown spikelets up to 1.2" (3 cm) long radiating along their length. the spikelets not touching each other at the base. Tiny curving filaments protrude from beneath the scales of blooming spikelets. Fruit a tiny, 3-sided brown seed (achene). CONFUSING PLANTS: Other sedges in the genus Cyperus-none are dangerous, but you can waste a lot of time digging the wrong plants. C. strigosus, what I call "false chufa," has more crowded and pointed spikelets. to verify your ID, dig and check for tubers. HABITAT: River floodplains, sandbars, mudflats, banks, lakeshores, disturbed wet meadows. it spreads in moist disturbed soil and agricultural fields and is often a common weed in clay-rich farmland. Native. FOOD USE: From fall through spring, dig around the plants and pick out the tubers. They can be refrigerated for long periods or dried. Traditionally dried (sometimes roasted) and ground into a flour or paste that is used in breads or mixed with water to make a drink (horchata). You can put the fresh tubers in a blender with water. then strain through a cloth to get a milky liquid for hot cereal or gravy. They are also dried and pressed for oil (which I've purchased but never made.) Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This widespread plant was domesticated in Egypt where it has been eaten for tens of thousands of years. It has also been an important cultivated food of the Owens Valley Paiute of California. Wild tubers are smaller, sparser, and more fibrous than the cultivated form, but still very good. AKA yellow nutsedge earth-almond. 247 