mm
1cm
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
/
Prairie star lily
1
2
Leucocrinum montanum
Asparagaceae (Asparagus family)
QUICK from basal CHECK: Low rosettes of short, fleshy, linear leaves; large white 6-petated flowers
a umbel in the center of the rosette. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Roots (there is no bulb) in a radiating cluster, whitish,
fleshy, gently tapered, 3-4 mm thick at the base. Rosettes are solitary or multiple. Leaves semi-
basal, white at the base, thick, fleshy, deeply U-channeled, sometimes weakly keeled, all
hairless but not glossy, slightly bluish-green, spreading to somewhat ascending, often twisted
a disorganized way, 4-8" (10-20 cm) long and 8-14 mm wide, the tips blunt-pointed. The outer leaves or curved in
rosette have broad, clear sheaths at the base that wrap around the cluster. Veins numerous and parallel; of there the
is no apparent midvein. Inflorescence a basal umbel directly from the center of the rosette. Flowers (spring)
1.5-2" (4-5 cm) across with 6 white tepals (in 2 layers of 3, not quite equal in size), the base a white tube 2 2.5" 2
(5-6.4 cm) long. The 6 stamens have large, elongated, yellow anthers. Fruit a capsule borne underground, P egg.
shaped, the tip broader than the base, 6-8
mm long, 3-sided, breaking open when
ripe to release shiny, black, angular seeds.
HABITAT: Dry, often sandy prairies,
especially on slopes and with disturbance.
Native.
FOOD USE: The small roots can be eaten
cooked, and taste something like day lily
tubers. The flowers are edible raw or
cooked. Conservation 3/1.
COMMENTS: Only a botanical Grinch
could dislike this eye-candy. Considering
that this long-lived plant must be killed
to eat its small, mediocre roots, they
shouldn't be high on anyone's gathering
list. A few flowers, however, can be taken
without harming the plant. AKA sand lily,
mountain lily.
8 River cane
1
2
Arundinaria gigantea
Poaceae (Grass family)
QUICK CHECK: Large ever-
green perennial grass with
hard, rigid stems (our only
native bamboo). ID difficulty
DESCRIPTION: Perennial
woody grass (bamboo), typi-
in dense colonies (canebrakes) spreading often
cally rhizomes. Stems 4-30° (1.2-g m) tall but rounded
by or arching, up to1" (2.5 cm) thick, each
leaning section (not with a flat side above
in cross in golden bamboo), with conspicuous branches,
node as nodes that usually have multiple all very small
ringed forked near the base and weakly
many to the stem. Branches purplish. with dead,
compared ascending, and covered (Continued
to brown strongly sheaths with hairy margins 249
on the next page.)
mm 1cm LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED / Prairie star lily 1 2 Leucocrinum montanum Asparagaceae (Asparagus family) QUICK from basal CHECK: Low rosettes of short, fleshy, linear leaves; large white 6-petated flowers a umbel in the center of the rosette. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Roots (there is no bulb) in a radiating cluster, whitish, fleshy, gently tapered, 3-4 mm thick at the base. Rosettes are solitary or multiple. Leaves semi- basal, white at the base, thick, fleshy, deeply U-channeled, sometimes weakly keeled, all hairless but not glossy, slightly bluish-green, spreading to somewhat ascending, often twisted a disorganized way, 4-8" (10-20 cm) long and 8-14 mm wide, the tips blunt-pointed. The outer leaves or curved in rosette have broad, clear sheaths at the base that wrap around the cluster. Veins numerous and parallel; of there the is no apparent midvein. Inflorescence a basal umbel directly from the center of the rosette. Flowers (spring) 1.5-2" (4-5 cm) across with 6 white tepals (in 2 layers of 3, not quite equal in size), the base a white tube 2 2.5" 2 (5-6.4 cm) long. The 6 stamens have large, elongated, yellow anthers. Fruit a capsule borne underground, P egg. shaped, the tip broader than the base, 6-8 mm long, 3-sided, breaking open when ripe to release shiny, black, angular seeds. HABITAT: Dry, often sandy prairies, especially on slopes and with disturbance. Native. FOOD USE: The small roots can be eaten cooked, and taste something like day lily tubers. The flowers are edible raw or cooked. Conservation 3/1. COMMENTS: Only a botanical Grinch could dislike this eye-candy. Considering that this long-lived plant must be killed to eat its small, mediocre roots, they shouldn't be high on anyone's gathering list. A few flowers, however, can be taken without harming the plant. AKA sand lily, mountain lily. 8 River cane 1 2 Arundinaria gigantea Poaceae (Grass family) QUICK CHECK: Large ever- green perennial grass with hard, rigid stems (our only native bamboo). ID difficulty DESCRIPTION: Perennial woody grass (bamboo), typi- in dense colonies (canebrakes) spreading often cally rhizomes. Stems 4-30° (1.2-g m) tall but rounded by or arching, up to1" (2.5 cm) thick, each leaning section (not with a flat side above in cross in golden bamboo), with conspicuous branches, node as nodes that usually have multiple all very small ringed forked near the base and weakly many to the stem. Branches purplish. with dead, compared ascending, and covered (Continued to brown strongly sheaths with hairy margins 249 on the next page.) 