LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
6 Purple nutsedge
Cyperus rotundus Cyperaceae 1 (Sedge family)
QUICK CHECK: Dark-leaved short sedge with a whorl of unequal leaves on top and an
unequal umbel of purple-brown spikelets, ID difficulty 1.
chufa (previous) but the base grows directly from a parent thick
DESCRIPTION: Similar which to sends out zero to a few wiry, crooked rhizomes and 1-2 mm tougher
covered with rhizomes. dark brown bearing sheaths. tubers at their are ends and often periodically along their in length, 0.2-0.9" connected (5-23 in chains. mm)
tuber near the surface, These persistent and much thicker
than chufa roundish to elongated or flattened, often amorphous or irregular-knobby shape, with bristly, chaffy scales,
Tubers the surface dark brownish-purple when mature (white when forming), covered than those of chufa,
long, sometimes claw-like buds; the flesh white and semi-hard. Leaves smaller almost
with one creased, or dark more blue-green, and the sheathed bundle at the base tends to be taller, appearing the umbel
stalk-like. strongly Stems to 24" (60 cm) tall. Inflorescence has typically 3-7 rays, and the bracts beneath
are shorter than those of chufa, none extending beyond the longest spike. Spikelets sparse, 5-14 per spike,
often curvy, dark brownish-purple, with the light-colored twisty filaments very evident against the dark scales.
HABITAT: Disturbed rich soil in full sun, especially agricultural fields, lawns, roadsides, ditches. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Tubers have been pounded and boiled or pressed for their oil, sometimes on a large scale (I have
not done this). They have a strong, unique flavor and I like to chew on them whole, especially the young ones.
I would like to try a horchata from these, but haven't had the chance yet.
COMMENTS: This plant has been given the title "worst
weed in the world" by some agronomists but it is most per-
nicious in tropical and subtropical crop fields. The tubers
were being intensively processed 19,000 years ago along
the Nile in Egypt. They are slightly bitter and quite oily with
the classic spicy-sedge aroma. Do you know the "spicy-
sedge aroma"? Stand downwind from a big sedge meadow
or a 90-degree July afternoon and you will. That's one of
my favorite smells in
the world. I'm tickled
by the fact that Na-
ture has encapsulat-
ed it in a vegetable,
but I'm not yet sure
of the best way to eat
that aroma,
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED 6 Purple nutsedge Cyperus rotundus Cyperaceae 1 (Sedge family) QUICK CHECK: Dark-leaved short sedge with a whorl of unequal leaves on top and an unequal umbel of purple-brown spikelets, ID difficulty 1. chufa (previous) but the base grows directly from a parent thick DESCRIPTION: Similar which to sends out zero to a few wiry, crooked rhizomes and 1-2 mm tougher covered with rhizomes. dark brown bearing sheaths. tubers at their are ends and often periodically along their in length, 0.2-0.9" connected (5-23 in chains. mm) tuber near the surface, These persistent and much thicker than chufa roundish to elongated or flattened, often amorphous or irregular-knobby shape, with bristly, chaffy scales, Tubers the surface dark brownish-purple when mature (white when forming), covered than those of chufa, long, sometimes claw-like buds; the flesh white and semi-hard. Leaves smaller almost with one creased, or dark more blue-green, and the sheathed bundle at the base tends to be taller, appearing the umbel stalk-like. strongly Stems to 24" (60 cm) tall. Inflorescence has typically 3-7 rays, and the bracts beneath are shorter than those of chufa, none extending beyond the longest spike. Spikelets sparse, 5-14 per spike, often curvy, dark brownish-purple, with the light-colored twisty filaments very evident against the dark scales. HABITAT: Disturbed rich soil in full sun, especially agricultural fields, lawns, roadsides, ditches. Introduced. FOOD USE: Tubers have been pounded and boiled or pressed for their oil, sometimes on a large scale (I have not done this). They have a strong, unique flavor and I like to chew on them whole, especially the young ones. I would like to try a horchata from these, but haven't had the chance yet. COMMENTS: This plant has been given the title "worst weed in the world" by some agronomists but it is most per- nicious in tropical and subtropical crop fields. The tubers were being intensively processed 19,000 years ago along the Nile in Egypt. They are slightly bitter and quite oily with the classic spicy-sedge aroma. Do you know the "spicy- sedge aroma"? Stand downwind from a big sedge meadow or a 90-degree July afternoon and you will. That's one of my favorite smells in the world. I'm tickled by the fact that Na- ture has encapsulat- ed it in a vegetable, but I'm not yet sure of the best way to eat that aroma, 