mm
0
1cm
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
9 Phragmites reed
2
Phragmites communis
Poaceae (Grass family)
QUICK plumes CHECK: at the Very tall grass forming dense colonies with stiff hollow
top. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: colonies. Stems Perennial grass spreading by rhizomes to form dense and often
low, not clumped, 6-14' (2-4 m) tall, rounded, smooth, purple or extensive
straight, erect, up to 0.7" (18 mm) thick. On shoots, leaf sheaths encircle green, the hol-
overlapping inside the vertically, the edges also overlapping around the stem; there is stems,
and 1-2" (2.5-5 shoot. cm) Leaves 2-ranked, sometimes arranged primarily on one side cottony of the stem, stuff
wide, arising from sheaths, the blades flat, not keeled, broadest in the 1-2 lower long
long-tapered to a very thin tip, lightly crimped in two spots roughly marking thirds of its length quarter then
hairy or raspy, but the margins are rough with minute teeth and have fine hairs. Sheath margins Surfaces not
purplish; there is a tuft of hair where a fully formed leaf joins the sheath. Inflorescence (summer to are thin fall) and
large, purplish, plume-like terminal panicle 6-16" (15-40 cm) long, with numerous slender ascending early branches, a
the branch tips and top nodding slightly. The panicle turns brown as the seeds ripen, and the branches
become all disposed toward one side. Spikelets have 3-6 flowers with long, silky hairs between them. may The
chaff has long-pointed tips but no extending awn. Seeds 2-3 mm long but not often forming.
CONFUSING PLANTS: River cane and giant reed Arundo donax are both evergreen and have thicker, stiffer stems.
HABITAT: Moist soil, marshes, wetland borders, ditches. Primarily in full sun, and especially common where
disturbed or degraded. There are native and non-native populations-the non-native ones are highly invasive. I
FOOD USE: Shoots are edible raw or cooked. Rhizome shoots (laterals) can be gathered and peeled in sum-
mer, but getting them out is only practical at the edges of colonies. Other food uses have been listed, but
1 have not had success with them. Conservation 1 (native subspecies).
COMMENTS: There are clearly distinguishable native and introduced forms of this plant, usually considered
separate subspecies. The native reed is smaller with sparser inflorescences and grows less densely; it blooms
and dies earlier in the growing season. The lower stem is purple and smooth (on the introduced reed it is
green and slightly ridged). Native Phragmites is a normal part of wetland communities, but the introduced
populations aggressively take over vast expanses to the virtual exclusion of all other vegetation, and such
monocultures may be seen near many urban areas in our region. Also, be carefui not to step on a reed sprout
while barefoot-they are sharp!
cenera)
shoots.
251
mm 0 1cm LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED 9 Phragmites reed 2 Phragmites communis Poaceae (Grass family) QUICK plumes CHECK: at the Very tall grass forming dense colonies with stiff hollow top. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: colonies. Stems Perennial grass spreading by rhizomes to form dense and often low, not clumped, 6-14' (2-4 m) tall, rounded, smooth, purple or extensive straight, erect, up to 0.7" (18 mm) thick. On shoots, leaf sheaths encircle green, the hol- overlapping inside the vertically, the edges also overlapping around the stem; there is stems, and 1-2" (2.5-5 shoot. cm) Leaves 2-ranked, sometimes arranged primarily on one side cottony of the stem, stuff wide, arising from sheaths, the blades flat, not keeled, broadest in the 1-2 lower long long-tapered to a very thin tip, lightly crimped in two spots roughly marking thirds of its length quarter then hairy or raspy, but the margins are rough with minute teeth and have fine hairs. Sheath margins Surfaces not purplish; there is a tuft of hair where a fully formed leaf joins the sheath. Inflorescence (summer to are thin fall) and large, purplish, plume-like terminal panicle 6-16" (15-40 cm) long, with numerous slender ascending early branches, a the branch tips and top nodding slightly. The panicle turns brown as the seeds ripen, and the branches become all disposed toward one side. Spikelets have 3-6 flowers with long, silky hairs between them. may The chaff has long-pointed tips but no extending awn. Seeds 2-3 mm long but not often forming. CONFUSING PLANTS: River cane and giant reed Arundo donax are both evergreen and have thicker, stiffer stems. HABITAT: Moist soil, marshes, wetland borders, ditches. Primarily in full sun, and especially common where disturbed or degraded. There are native and non-native populations-the non-native ones are highly invasive. I FOOD USE: Shoots are edible raw or cooked. Rhizome shoots (laterals) can be gathered and peeled in sum- mer, but getting them out is only practical at the edges of colonies. Other food uses have been listed, but 1 have not had success with them. Conservation 1 (native subspecies). COMMENTS: There are clearly distinguishable native and introduced forms of this plant, usually considered separate subspecies. The native reed is smaller with sparser inflorescences and grows less densely; it blooms and dies earlier in the growing season. The lower stem is purple and smooth (on the introduced reed it is green and slightly ridged). Native Phragmites is a normal part of wetland communities, but the introduced populations aggressively take over vast expanses to the virtual exclusion of all other vegetation, and such monocultures may be seen near many urban areas in our region. Also, be carefui not to step on a reed sprout while barefoot-they are sharp! cenera) shoots. 251 