LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
8 River to clustered cane (continued) at the tips of short branches. creating a palm-like look. and Blades bristle-like 4-12" tips, (10-30 a depressed long
Leaves up 5 petiole-like base, with acuminate Inflorescence
and midvein, 0 and (1-5 scattered cm) wide. erect flat. hairs norrowed below. to Margins a roughened (April-May, by tiny forward-pointing but rarely produced) bristles. a loose terminal
panicle with the male and female flowers separate,
unshowy, the branches drooping in fruit. Seeds 0.4-
0.6" (10-15 mm) long, broadest in the middle and
tapered to both ends, encased in chaff without awns.
HABITAT: Wetlands, floodplains, moist slopes and
ravines with rich soil-often in light shade but more
robust in full sun. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather shoots in spring or early summer,
peel off the leaves, and eat cooked or raw. If you are
lucky enough to encounter a fruiting colony, it is a
foraging bonanza. When ripe (look for brown chaff)
the seeds can be harvested by leaning the plants over
a large container such as a wheelbarrow or sled and
knocking the heads with a stick, which will dislodge
ripe grains easily from the panicle. After harvest, dry,
parch, rub, and winnow (see p. 27). The grain can be
boiled into mush or ground into flour. Conservation 1/1.
COMMENTS: A colony may grow for decades or
centuries before flowering, after which it dies. This is
perhaps the largest grass seed native to our continent,
and would be among the premiere starchy foods of
North America if it produced consistently. The only
drawback is a tough strip down the side of each grain
that makes it less pleasant to eat. River cane has suf-
fered due to fire suppression and its preference for
the most fertile sites, which have been largely taken
for farmland. Some botanists consider all of our forms
Ripe rivercane seedheads.
to be variation within a single species, while others
recognize three similar species of native cane.
Related edibles:
Bamboo (multiple species and genera)
our but Several vary non-native in quality and bamboos should are be grown boiled ornamentally and drained before and sometimes escape. 2 The shoots are generally edible
turn nodes region yellow is when golden exposed bamboo to Phyllostachys sunlight. These aurea, have which flat grows eating. 12-30' The (3.5-9 most m) common tall and feral has Asian stems bamboo that in
near the base are often densely packed and bulging. a area The on sheath one side scars above are fringed each node, with whitish and the hairs. often stem
Peeled bamboo shoot
Bambac shoot.
Colden bamboon blong
250
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED 8 River to clustered cane (continued) at the tips of short branches. creating a palm-like look. and Blades bristle-like 4-12" tips, (10-30 a depressed long Leaves up 5 petiole-like base, with acuminate Inflorescence and midvein, 0 and (1-5 scattered cm) wide. erect flat. hairs norrowed below. to Margins a roughened (April-May, by tiny forward-pointing but rarely produced) bristles. a loose terminal panicle with the male and female flowers separate, unshowy, the branches drooping in fruit. Seeds 0.4- 0.6" (10-15 mm) long, broadest in the middle and tapered to both ends, encased in chaff without awns. HABITAT: Wetlands, floodplains, moist slopes and ravines with rich soil-often in light shade but more robust in full sun. Native. FOOD USE: Gather shoots in spring or early summer, peel off the leaves, and eat cooked or raw. If you are lucky enough to encounter a fruiting colony, it is a foraging bonanza. When ripe (look for brown chaff) the seeds can be harvested by leaning the plants over a large container such as a wheelbarrow or sled and knocking the heads with a stick, which will dislodge ripe grains easily from the panicle. After harvest, dry, parch, rub, and winnow (see p. 27). The grain can be boiled into mush or ground into flour. Conservation 1/1. COMMENTS: A colony may grow for decades or centuries before flowering, after which it dies. This is perhaps the largest grass seed native to our continent, and would be among the premiere starchy foods of North America if it produced consistently. The only drawback is a tough strip down the side of each grain that makes it less pleasant to eat. River cane has suf- fered due to fire suppression and its preference for the most fertile sites, which have been largely taken for farmland. Some botanists consider all of our forms Ripe rivercane seedheads. to be variation within a single species, while others recognize three similar species of native cane. Related edibles: Bamboo (multiple species and genera) our but Several vary non-native in quality and bamboos should are be grown boiled ornamentally and drained before and sometimes escape. 2 The shoots are generally edible turn nodes region yellow is when golden exposed bamboo to Phyllostachys sunlight. These aurea, have which flat grows eating. 12-30' The (3.5-9 most m) common tall and feral has Asian stems bamboo that in near the base are often densely packed and bulging. a area The on sheath one side scars above are fringed each node, with whitish and the hairs. often stem Peeled bamboo shoot Bambac shoot. Colden bamboon blong 250 