LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
2
10 Western rice grass
(Grass
family)
+
Poaceae
Oryzopsis hymenoides clumped grass with thin wiry leaves difficulty and loose, 1. spreading
DESCRIPTION: A dozens hundreds of stems each. Basal year's growth,
panicles "bunchgrass"-each plant has several stems, and multiple leaves adjacent numer-
QUICK CHECK: of stout, Knee-bigh dark seeds with an attached tuft of hair. ID
plants often form large clumps with early among or the persistent remains of last (18-30 cm) long
the ous. central cold-hardy ones and erect emerging but the the outer margins ones spreading often strongly or limp. rolled Blades inward 7-12" making it cm) almost tall, needle about or 2 mm wire-like. thick, Most hair-
and extremely thin (1-3 mm), Stems erect, 12-22" (30-56 abruptly.
basal leaves stem are usually brown by has the 2 leaves time seeds sheathing ripen. it for a few inches before the usually free portion spreading narrows dichotomously
less. Each than wide and very loose, the branches ripening, the
Panicles 6-11" (15-28 the mm) spikelets long, taller widely separated and the pedicels thread-thin and wavy. a wavy Upon awn 4-7 mm long
at angles of 110-170°, bracts spread open to release the chaff-covered seeds, which have brown to black, oval,
two and are enclosing embedded in a whitish downy tuft that catches the wind for dispersal. Grains dark
2-3 mm long, pointed, with a thick seedcoat.
HABITAT: Dry, sunny sites in prairies, especially slopes and sandy areas or where disturbed; often common
on roadsides. Native.
FOOD USE: The grain is gathered in early to mid summer by beating the heads into a bin or basket, or by
stripping the tops by hand. Dark, plump seeds are good; empties are smaller and light brown. Parch to burn
off the fluff, then rub and winnow to purify the seed (see p. 27). Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This was formerly a staple Indigenous food in the High Plains and Intermountain West. It often
grows in large populations and the seeds are moderately large and easier to harvest and winnow than those
of most other grasses. Unfortunately, the seed has a thick coat that is hard to remove. It is possible to eat it
without removal if the seed is ground or pounded, but this adds a lot of roughage. Western rice grass has been
the subject of much selection, research, breeding, and (gulp) even some genetic engineering. For a while in
the 2000's one variety was commercially grown in Montana as a cereal crop. This is one of the most important
livestock range plants of the semi-arid West, and it is the state grass of both Nevada and Utah. AKA Indian
rice grass, sandgrass, Stipa hymenoides, Eriocoma hymenoides, Achnatherum hymenoides.
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED 2 10 Western rice grass (Grass family) + Poaceae Oryzopsis hymenoides clumped grass with thin wiry leaves difficulty and loose, 1. spreading DESCRIPTION: A dozens hundreds of stems each. Basal year's growth, panicles "bunchgrass"-each plant has several stems, and multiple leaves adjacent numer- QUICK CHECK: of stout, Knee-bigh dark seeds with an attached tuft of hair. ID plants often form large clumps with early among or the persistent remains of last (18-30 cm) long the ous. central cold-hardy ones and erect emerging but the the outer margins ones spreading often strongly or limp. rolled Blades inward 7-12" making it cm) almost tall, needle about or 2 mm wire-like. thick, Most hair- and extremely thin (1-3 mm), Stems erect, 12-22" (30-56 abruptly. basal leaves stem are usually brown by has the 2 leaves time seeds sheathing ripen. it for a few inches before the usually free portion spreading narrows dichotomously less. Each than wide and very loose, the branches ripening, the Panicles 6-11" (15-28 the mm) spikelets long, taller widely separated and the pedicels thread-thin and wavy. a wavy Upon awn 4-7 mm long at angles of 110-170°, bracts spread open to release the chaff-covered seeds, which have brown to black, oval, two and are enclosing embedded in a whitish downy tuft that catches the wind for dispersal. Grains dark 2-3 mm long, pointed, with a thick seedcoat. HABITAT: Dry, sunny sites in prairies, especially slopes and sandy areas or where disturbed; often common on roadsides. Native. FOOD USE: The grain is gathered in early to mid summer by beating the heads into a bin or basket, or by stripping the tops by hand. Dark, plump seeds are good; empties are smaller and light brown. Parch to burn off the fluff, then rub and winnow to purify the seed (see p. 27). Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This was formerly a staple Indigenous food in the High Plains and Intermountain West. It often grows in large populations and the seeds are moderately large and easier to harvest and winnow than those of most other grasses. Unfortunately, the seed has a thick coat that is hard to remove. It is possible to eat it without removal if the seed is ground or pounded, but this adds a lot of roughage. Western rice grass has been the subject of much selection, research, breeding, and (gulp) even some genetic engineering. For a while in the 2000's one variety was commercially grown in Montana as a cereal crop. This is one of the most important livestock range plants of the semi-arid West, and it is the state grass of both Nevada and Utah. AKA Indian rice grass, sandgrass, Stipa hymenoides, Eriocoma hymenoides, Achnatherum hymenoides. 