0
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
11 Maygrass
2
Phalaris caroliniana Poaceae (Grass family)
QUICK CHECK: Waist-high grass with short, plump, fluffy heads lacking awins. atop a
thin, nearly naked stem; falling seeds tiny and teardrop-shaped. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Annual grass 12-40" (30-100 cm) tall, single or forming tufts. Stems erect,
1-3.5 mm thick, hairless, sparingly branched in the lower part. Leaves to 8" (20 cm) long,
few and sparse, the free portions of blades not overlapping on the upper half of the stem.
Blade flat, smooth, hairless, 2-9 mm wide; it feels smooth when rubbed from bottom to top but minutely
raspy when rubbed from tip to base. Leaf sheath 1.5-2.5" (4-6 cm) long, rounded and smooth on the back
Inflorescence an oblong panicle 0.8-2.4" (2-6 cm) long, narrowed at both ends, oriented vertically, bushy and
dense, the branches not evident unless you take the panicle apart. It is borne at the top of a naked section of
stem 4-12" (10-30 cm) long and 1 mm thick. Grains borne between two ovate scales (glumes) 5-6 mm long.
with a scabrous keel (hard to see with the naked eye), and a sharp boat-like tip, but no own. These glumes
have a lanceolate-shaped window of clear or whitish material in the center and on one edge, giving them a
snow-on-the-mountain look. The unit that falls free (grain wrapped in thin chaff) is 3-5 mm long and teardrop-
shaped with an acuminate tip; the surface has minute appressed hairs that are hard to see. The separated
grains are egg-shaped and 2-3 mm long.
HABITAT: Old fields, disturbed moist ground, floodplain forests, alluvial soil near creeks-especially loamy
sand. Likes full sun. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather grain in late spring, parch, rub, and winnow (see p. 27). Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Archeobotany indicates that this grass was formerly much harvested and probably cultivated in
parts of the South,
although this tradi-
tion has been dead
for hundreds of
years. Although the
seeds and heads are
small, their tall and
exposed position
on the plant, lack
of attached awns.
ease of separation,
low chaff percent-
age, and the pres-
ence of large pure
stands, must have
all contributed to
the practicality of
using this grain. It
often grows mixed
with little barley
and sumpweed,
two other impor-
tant ancient seeds,
and suspect that
the entire commu-
nity was managed
with fire.
253
0 LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED 11 Maygrass 2 Phalaris caroliniana Poaceae (Grass family) QUICK CHECK: Waist-high grass with short, plump, fluffy heads lacking awins. atop a thin, nearly naked stem; falling seeds tiny and teardrop-shaped. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Annual grass 12-40" (30-100 cm) tall, single or forming tufts. Stems erect, 1-3.5 mm thick, hairless, sparingly branched in the lower part. Leaves to 8" (20 cm) long, few and sparse, the free portions of blades not overlapping on the upper half of the stem. Blade flat, smooth, hairless, 2-9 mm wide; it feels smooth when rubbed from bottom to top but minutely raspy when rubbed from tip to base. Leaf sheath 1.5-2.5" (4-6 cm) long, rounded and smooth on the back Inflorescence an oblong panicle 0.8-2.4" (2-6 cm) long, narrowed at both ends, oriented vertically, bushy and dense, the branches not evident unless you take the panicle apart. It is borne at the top of a naked section of stem 4-12" (10-30 cm) long and 1 mm thick. Grains borne between two ovate scales (glumes) 5-6 mm long. with a scabrous keel (hard to see with the naked eye), and a sharp boat-like tip, but no own. These glumes have a lanceolate-shaped window of clear or whitish material in the center and on one edge, giving them a snow-on-the-mountain look. The unit that falls free (grain wrapped in thin chaff) is 3-5 mm long and teardrop- shaped with an acuminate tip; the surface has minute appressed hairs that are hard to see. The separated grains are egg-shaped and 2-3 mm long. HABITAT: Old fields, disturbed moist ground, floodplain forests, alluvial soil near creeks-especially loamy sand. Likes full sun. Native. FOOD USE: Gather grain in late spring, parch, rub, and winnow (see p. 27). Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Archeobotany indicates that this grass was formerly much harvested and probably cultivated in parts of the South, although this tradi- tion has been dead for hundreds of years. Although the seeds and heads are small, their tall and exposed position on the plant, lack of attached awns. ease of separation, low chaff percent- age, and the pres- ence of large pure stands, must have all contributed to the practicality of using this grain. It often grows mixed with little barley and sumpweed, two other impor- tant ancient seeds, and suspect that the entire commu- nity was managed with fire. 253 