1cm
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
13 Small blazing star
2
Liatris punctata/mucronata
Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK CHECK: Shin-high plant with clumped stems and very narrow, sharp,
pointed leaves; purple flower heads small, crowded, erect, and narrow. ID difficulty tough, 3.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from an enlarged root. Roots may be elongated and carrot-like
or short and bulbous; they are firm with alternating light and dark layers when sliced (a char-
acteristic shared by all Liatris I have checked). Basal leaves mostly wither by flowering and
are similar to the stem leaves, only somewhat larger with the base narrowed to a petiole.
Stems usually clumped, 2-15 per plant, 12-26" (30-66 cm) tall and 2-5 mm thick, erect or leaning, stiff. often
curved, unbranched. Stem leaves alternate, 2-5" (5-13 cm) long and very narrow, 3-7 mm wide, linear, sessile,
numerous, overlapping, crowded, strongly ascending, tough and stiff, the tips darkened but with a light-
colored needle-point. The surface has tiny darkened, depressed dots on both sides; it is hairless except on
the margins, which are entire, often whitish and papery, with scattered short, stiff hairs. Midvein protrudes
slightly above and below; other veins not evident. Inflorescence a leafy spike of numerous small heads nearly
appressed to the rachis, moderately crowded and somewhat overlapping, encompassing the upper third of the
stem. Heads longer than wide with only 3-8 florets. Bracts appressed, overlapping, triangular, with a purple
midvein, an acuminate claw-like bristle at the tip, and the margins ciliate and purple. Florets purple with
5 spreading, curled, lanceolate lobes, the column in the center very dark purple near the base, Fruit a dry seed
(achene) with a feathery pappus.
CONFUSING RELATED EDIBLES: Liatris is an easy genus to recognize, but the members can be confusing
to differentiate. None are dangerous, but the roots of most are too woody to be food. L. aspera also has an
enlarged bulbous root-but it has a strong soapy flavor and can only be eaten sparingly. L. aspera averages
slightly taller and has larger, broader leaves; the flowerheads are larger and less crowded. L. squarrosa also
has a roundish root; it has sparser leaves, grows on poor soil, and has more than 10 florets per head.
HABITAT: Dry prairies in rich or sandy soil. Native.
FOOD USE: The roots are reported as food from several
Native peoples on the Great Plains, although they are
not commonly eaten today. The elongated taproots are
tough and woody. However, some round, enlarged roots
are less tough, and they have a mild pleasant flavor that
is good in stews. Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: Neither the taxonomy nor the ethnobotany
of these plants is sorted out. Most botanists recognize
a single species of Liatris punctata, but some have split
this into two closely related species with nearly identical
above-ground parts, but quite different underground
If they are separated, those with woody taproots roots
parts. L. punctata and those with semi-hard roundish stems
are L. mucronata. By this scheme, the flowering Minnesota
are here are L. punctata from rich soil in sandy soil
pictured bulbous taproot is L mucronata from but the
and Oklahoma, the late the root pictured and liked woody. It.
elongated in roots I've tried have been very
1cm LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED 13 Small blazing star 2 Liatris punctata/mucronata Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK CHECK: Shin-high plant with clumped stems and very narrow, sharp, pointed leaves; purple flower heads small, crowded, erect, and narrow. ID difficulty tough, 3. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from an enlarged root. Roots may be elongated and carrot-like or short and bulbous; they are firm with alternating light and dark layers when sliced (a char- acteristic shared by all Liatris I have checked). Basal leaves mostly wither by flowering and are similar to the stem leaves, only somewhat larger with the base narrowed to a petiole. Stems usually clumped, 2-15 per plant, 12-26" (30-66 cm) tall and 2-5 mm thick, erect or leaning, stiff. often curved, unbranched. Stem leaves alternate, 2-5" (5-13 cm) long and very narrow, 3-7 mm wide, linear, sessile, numerous, overlapping, crowded, strongly ascending, tough and stiff, the tips darkened but with a light- colored needle-point. The surface has tiny darkened, depressed dots on both sides; it is hairless except on the margins, which are entire, often whitish and papery, with scattered short, stiff hairs. Midvein protrudes slightly above and below; other veins not evident. Inflorescence a leafy spike of numerous small heads nearly appressed to the rachis, moderately crowded and somewhat overlapping, encompassing the upper third of the stem. Heads longer than wide with only 3-8 florets. Bracts appressed, overlapping, triangular, with a purple midvein, an acuminate claw-like bristle at the tip, and the margins ciliate and purple. Florets purple with 5 spreading, curled, lanceolate lobes, the column in the center very dark purple near the base, Fruit a dry seed (achene) with a feathery pappus. CONFUSING RELATED EDIBLES: Liatris is an easy genus to recognize, but the members can be confusing to differentiate. None are dangerous, but the roots of most are too woody to be food. L. aspera also has an enlarged bulbous root-but it has a strong soapy flavor and can only be eaten sparingly. L. aspera averages slightly taller and has larger, broader leaves; the flowerheads are larger and less crowded. L. squarrosa also has a roundish root; it has sparser leaves, grows on poor soil, and has more than 10 florets per head. HABITAT: Dry prairies in rich or sandy soil. Native. FOOD USE: The roots are reported as food from several Native peoples on the Great Plains, although they are not commonly eaten today. The elongated taproots are tough and woody. However, some round, enlarged roots are less tough, and they have a mild pleasant flavor that is good in stews. Conservation 3. COMMENTS: Neither the taxonomy nor the ethnobotany of these plants is sorted out. Most botanists recognize a single species of Liatris punctata, but some have split this into two closely related species with nearly identical above-ground parts, but quite different underground If they are separated, those with woody taproots roots parts. L. punctata and those with semi-hard roundish stems are L. mucronata. By this scheme, the flowering Minnesota are here are L. punctata from rich soil in sandy soil pictured bulbous taproot is L mucronata from but the and Oklahoma, the late the root pictured and liked woody. It. elongated in roots I've tried have been very 