LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT
17 Little barley
2
(Grass
family)
Hordeum pusillum grass of disturbed Poaceae soil with proportionately difficulty 1. large vertical heads, at
the QUICK DESCRIPTION: seeds CHECK: with long Short Short awns annual ripening grass in to late 20" smooth, (50 spring. cm) mostly ID tall. Stems straight erect, but occasionally single and or mostly branched "bent toward at
the the knee" base to erect somewhere, form or loose strongly the tufts, lower ascending, very nodes thin, 2-4" distinctly (5-10 inrolled darkened. cm) or long boat-like, Leaves and 3-6 especially few mm wide, at narrowing the tip and and awns rather when also brown. abruptly erec I
the point, base, the blades flat at first, slightly the edges flattened later spike 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) shorter long, sterile the spikelets spikelets, so the "disarticul Dr)
never rescence spreading. a single, that Each erect, breaks seed-bearing off with a spikelet grain in is it) surrounded has a long mm awn by long. surrounded by several shorter awns.
spikelets unit" (the jump thing Well-drained, like grasshoppers. disturbed Seeds soil are in full narrow sun. and Roadsides, 2-3 farm fields, Native. construction sites, pastures, 5
HABITAT: Commonly seen lining interstates in spring.
clearings in floodplains. Used as a grain like barley. (See grain processing, p. 27.) Seeds the spikelets. ripen in late My spring experience or early is sum lim
FOOD USE: them, then thresh out dangerous :
Beat this them one into is tricky a basket, to de-hull, or cut and sheafs the and chaff dry percentage is very high. 1. Parching to burn off the
but especially important when processing this cereal. Conservation
is There are very few plants that you can identify by the name, but if you know This what domestic was once b 8
COMMENTS: will easily recognize this relative. which looks like a miniature version. find grass in archeological
looks in like, you quantities and probably cultivated thousands of years ago; it is a regular at the slightest tou
ered South. great When collect it, fully ripe spikelets seem to jump off the top of the plant being s(
doing of the so they embed you in clothing or fur. I do not know if this results from the kinetic energy of contact
how channeled
to the spikelet,
or if there is ten-
sion built into
the rachis that
is released (like
an exploding
jewelweed pod)
by touch. Either
way, walking
through it gives
you the feeling
that hundreds of
tiny grasshop-
pers are jumping
from the tops of
the grain heads
254
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT 17 Little barley 2 (Grass family) Hordeum pusillum grass of disturbed Poaceae soil with proportionately difficulty 1. large vertical heads, at the QUICK DESCRIPTION: seeds CHECK: with long Short Short awns annual ripening grass in to late 20" smooth, (50 spring. cm) mostly ID tall. Stems straight erect, but occasionally single and or mostly branched "bent toward at the the knee" base to erect somewhere, form or loose strongly the tufts, lower ascending, very nodes thin, 2-4" distinctly (5-10 inrolled darkened. cm) or long boat-like, Leaves and 3-6 especially few mm wide, at narrowing the tip and and awns rather when also brown. abruptly erec I the point, base, the blades flat at first, slightly the edges flattened later spike 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) shorter long, sterile the spikelets spikelets, so the "disarticul Dr) never rescence spreading. a single, that Each erect, breaks seed-bearing off with a spikelet grain in is it) surrounded has a long mm awn by long. surrounded by several shorter awns. spikelets unit" (the jump thing Well-drained, like grasshoppers. disturbed Seeds soil are in full narrow sun. and Roadsides, 2-3 farm fields, Native. construction sites, pastures, 5 HABITAT: Commonly seen lining interstates in spring. clearings in floodplains. Used as a grain like barley. (See grain processing, p. 27.) Seeds the spikelets. ripen in late My spring experience or early is sum lim FOOD USE: them, then thresh out dangerous : Beat this them one into is tricky a basket, to de-hull, or cut and sheafs the and chaff dry percentage is very high. 1. Parching to burn off the but especially important when processing this cereal. Conservation is There are very few plants that you can identify by the name, but if you know This what domestic was once b 8 COMMENTS: will easily recognize this relative. which looks like a miniature version. find grass in archeological looks in like, you quantities and probably cultivated thousands of years ago; it is a regular at the slightest tou ered South. great When collect it, fully ripe spikelets seem to jump off the top of the plant being s( doing of the so they embed you in clothing or fur. I do not know if this results from the kinetic energy of contact how channeled to the spikelet, or if there is ten- sion built into the rachis that is released (like an exploding jewelweed pod) by touch. Either way, walking through it gives you the feeling that hundreds of tiny grasshop- pers are jumping from the tops of the grain heads 254 