LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
14 Seaside Plantain
3
2
Plantago maritima
family
Plantaginaceae
QUICK CHECK: Dense rosette of numerous elongated fleshy leaves with a midvein
groove, leafless spikes packed with unshowy flowers. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a thick taproot, older ones producing multiple adjacent
rosettes. Leaves numerous, all basal, erect to leaning or spreading, linear, 4-7" (10-18 cm)
long and 0.4-0.6" (10-15 mm) wide, very thick and fleshy, hairless, brittle, folded or curved
into a trough, with a slight groove down the center. Midvein slightly lighter green, as is
the one faintly visible vein on each side. The tips are pointed and darkened; the bases are not sheathed. Mar-
gins sometimes minutely hairy, entire or with widely scattered tiny teeth. Scape single, unbranched, leafless,
4-10" (10-25 cm) long, erect to leaning or spreading, often wavy, soft-hairy (especially on the upper part),
round, often reddish. Inflorescence a spike on the upper third of the stem, the flowers densely packed and
touching. Flowers (June-September) tiny, greenish white, with a tube spreading into 4 lobes at the end. Fruit an
egg-shaped capsule that separates around the middle when ripe to release multiple dark seeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Seaside arrow-grass has longer. thinner leaves and taller stalks with less densely flow-
ered spikes; its leaves
are distinctly sheathed
at the base.
HABITAT: Rocky slopes,
cliffs. tidal marshes,
upper edges of beaches,
and occasionally salty
highway shoulders, in
full sun. Native.
FOOD USE: Leaves
can be gathered at any
time during the grow-
ing season and eaten
raw or cooked. They are
mildly salty, tender, and
delicious. Young flower
stalks can also be eaten.
Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This is a
common plant, excel-
lent for eating, with a
long season of availabil-
ity When it grows on
roadsides away from the
coast it is less salty and
more astringent. AKA
Goose tongue, P. oligan-
thos, P. juncoides.
256
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED 14 Seaside Plantain 3 2 Plantago maritima family Plantaginaceae QUICK CHECK: Dense rosette of numerous elongated fleshy leaves with a midvein groove, leafless spikes packed with unshowy flowers. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a thick taproot, older ones producing multiple adjacent rosettes. Leaves numerous, all basal, erect to leaning or spreading, linear, 4-7" (10-18 cm) long and 0.4-0.6" (10-15 mm) wide, very thick and fleshy, hairless, brittle, folded or curved into a trough, with a slight groove down the center. Midvein slightly lighter green, as is the one faintly visible vein on each side. The tips are pointed and darkened; the bases are not sheathed. Mar- gins sometimes minutely hairy, entire or with widely scattered tiny teeth. Scape single, unbranched, leafless, 4-10" (10-25 cm) long, erect to leaning or spreading, often wavy, soft-hairy (especially on the upper part), round, often reddish. Inflorescence a spike on the upper third of the stem, the flowers densely packed and touching. Flowers (June-September) tiny, greenish white, with a tube spreading into 4 lobes at the end. Fruit an egg-shaped capsule that separates around the middle when ripe to release multiple dark seeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: Seaside arrow-grass has longer. thinner leaves and taller stalks with less densely flow- ered spikes; its leaves are distinctly sheathed at the base. HABITAT: Rocky slopes, cliffs. tidal marshes, upper edges of beaches, and occasionally salty highway shoulders, in full sun. Native. FOOD USE: Leaves can be gathered at any time during the grow- ing season and eaten raw or cooked. They are mildly salty, tender, and delicious. Young flower stalks can also be eaten. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This is a common plant, excel- lent for eating, with a long season of availabil- ity When it grows on roadsides away from the coast it is less salty and more astringent. AKA Goose tongue, P. oligan- thos, P. juncoides. 256 