LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
2
2
Yucca Asparagaceae (Asparagus family)
flower A dense stalk cluster with large of numerous drooping long, flowers. sharp ID difficulty tipped, tough loaves
Perennials with a tough, semi-woody base 1.
on certain species. Leaves all basal (or in whorl that occasionally becomes
fibers 16-30" attached (40-75 to cm) long and up to 2" (5 cm) a wide, tough at the and stem tip), several
no petioles. Stem the margins), evergreen, sharp-tipped, with stringy (often
leaves. cm) tall and 0.8-1.6" (2-4 cm) thick, round, solid, leaning later),
single from the rosette center, erect (sometimes no prominent
Composite
numerous Inflorescence and large, 1.5-3.5" a large panicle or raceme at the bearing apex of only this reduced, stalk. Flowers range in
parate (4-9 cm) across, drooping nodding, (early mid
tepals; there are six stout stamens with the tips cocked or white to greenish off te
summer to fall) a large, oblong, 3-part green capsule that turns outward brown and surrounding splits open a stost upon stigma ying,
containing numerous black seeds.
HABITAT: Sunny sites on sand, gravel, or rocky
soil. Outside of the Great Plains, yuccas are
mostly found on dunes, sunny slopes, outcrops.
barrens, roadsides, or disturbed forest edges.
Native, but also widely cultivated and escaped
outside of their natural ranges.
FOOD USE: The flower stalk shoot in late
spring or early summer can be used as a
cooked vegetable. Peel the outer skin for the
best dining experience. Eat flower petals raw
or cooked in midsummer. (Some people find
them slightly irritating raw.) The fruit of some
species is cooked and eaten, sometimes dried
for storage, although i have not eaten the fruit
of any yuccas in our region. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: "Yucca" is pronounced with a
short u sound and should not be confused with
the tropical root crop yuca (pronounced with a
long U sound), also called manioc or cassava.
often misspelled by grocery stores and produce
distributors, creating endless confusion. The
two plants are unrelated and utterly dissimilar.
Yuca has edible roots; yucca does not!
SPECIES: There are 8-10 yuccas native to our
area, depending on who doing the counting,
and all are edible. I'm featuring the two most
common and widespread here:
Great Plains yucca Y. glaucais widespread on
the prairies. It has stiff. broadly U-channeled
leaves 8-12 mm wide with needle-like tips. The
inflorescence IS a raceme standing less than
5' (1.5 m) high, bearing its lowest flowers be-
neath the height of the leaves. Nearly identical
yuccas further south on the Plains are some-
times called Y arkansana. differ entrated by
having leaves about twice as wide.
(Continued on the next page.)
257
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED 2 2 Yucca Asparagaceae (Asparagus family) flower A dense stalk cluster with large of numerous drooping long, flowers. sharp ID difficulty tipped, tough loaves Perennials with a tough, semi-woody base 1. on certain species. Leaves all basal (or in whorl that occasionally becomes fibers 16-30" attached (40-75 to cm) long and up to 2" (5 cm) a wide, tough at the and stem tip), several no petioles. Stem the margins), evergreen, sharp-tipped, with stringy (often leaves. cm) tall and 0.8-1.6" (2-4 cm) thick, round, solid, leaning later), single from the rosette center, erect (sometimes no prominent Composite numerous Inflorescence and large, 1.5-3.5" a large panicle or raceme at the bearing apex of only this reduced, stalk. Flowers range in parate (4-9 cm) across, drooping nodding, (early mid tepals; there are six stout stamens with the tips cocked or white to greenish off te summer to fall) a large, oblong, 3-part green capsule that turns outward brown and surrounding splits open a stost upon stigma ying, containing numerous black seeds. HABITAT: Sunny sites on sand, gravel, or rocky soil. Outside of the Great Plains, yuccas are mostly found on dunes, sunny slopes, outcrops. barrens, roadsides, or disturbed forest edges. Native, but also widely cultivated and escaped outside of their natural ranges. FOOD USE: The flower stalk shoot in late spring or early summer can be used as a cooked vegetable. Peel the outer skin for the best dining experience. Eat flower petals raw or cooked in midsummer. (Some people find them slightly irritating raw.) The fruit of some species is cooked and eaten, sometimes dried for storage, although i have not eaten the fruit of any yuccas in our region. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: "Yucca" is pronounced with a short u sound and should not be confused with the tropical root crop yuca (pronounced with a long U sound), also called manioc or cassava. often misspelled by grocery stores and produce distributors, creating endless confusion. The two plants are unrelated and utterly dissimilar. Yuca has edible roots; yucca does not! SPECIES: There are 8-10 yuccas native to our area, depending on who doing the counting, and all are edible. I'm featuring the two most common and widespread here: Great Plains yucca Y. glaucais widespread on the prairies. It has stiff. broadly U-channeled leaves 8-12 mm wide with needle-like tips. The inflorescence IS a raceme standing less than 5' (1.5 m) high, bearing its lowest flowers be- neath the height of the leaves. Nearly identical yuccas further south on the Plains are some- times called Y arkansana. differ entrated by having leaves about twice as wide. (Continued on the next page.) 257 