0
1cm
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
16 False garlic
2
Nothoscordum bivalve Alliaceae (Onion family)
QUICK flowers CHECK: All leaves basal; a single scape hearing an umbel of
with 6 petals. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Polycarpic perennial. Bulbs globular or egg shaped to
bulging, especially when large, 0.3-0.9" (8-23 mm) wide, the larger ones amorphous with and
scale-like offset bulbs. Leaves 3-7, all basal, wrapped in a sheath for 1-2" (2.5-5 small.
above blunt and the bulb, the blades to 15" (38 cm) long and 2-5 mm wide, shallowly U-channeled, cm) not
thin. Scapes 6-16" (15-40 cm) tall, single, erect, straight, solid, smooth, hairless. cound nollow, to the tips
angled. Inflorescence a single terminal umbel of 5-12 with 2 brown, papery, triangular, pointed bracts beneath slightly
it, the pedicels ascending and unequal, 1.5-2.2" (3.8-5.6 cm) long. Flowers (mostly spring but orr asionally
through summer and often in fall) have 6 long-elliptic, blunt pointed, white tepals 9-13 mm long arranged
2 layers of 3, each with a prominent center vein (on the outside this vein is yellow-green at the base but often
purplish toward the tip); stamens 6. Fruit a 3-part capsule, egg-shaped, wider at the tip (which 15 etimes
flattened), 3-5 mm wide and 6-10 mm long, turning light brown upon drying and splitting into boat-shased
valves holding angular, rough, black seeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Star-of-Bethlehem (p. 666) is shorter with very slimy sap. The leaves have a whitisn
center stripe and the flowers are in a short raceme.
HABITAT: Full to partial sun with moderately rich soil of medium
moisture, especially where disturbed. Lawns, roadsides, parks, mead-
OWS, high floodplains, savan-
nahs, sparse forests and edges.
Native.
FOOD USE: Bulbs can be col-
lected at any time and eaten
cooked. They have a faint garlic
flavor. Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: At the moment
of writing I have eaten these
bulbs on four occasions, in
greater quantity each time
(in the last instance a quarter
cup). Archeological evidence
suggests that false garlic was
once an important food in some
regions. This species was for-
merly classified in the genus
Allium, and the differences by
which it is separated are minor
The garlic flavor is faint but evi-
dent when you eat the bulbs.
Though common in lawns. this
plant is much smaller there
than in unmowed grassy areas
AKA crow poison. but you
won have muc luck poisoning
crows with it The name crow
poison" IS thrown as a number
of remotely similar plants such
as Amianthium must się views
which is as tuany poisonous
259
0 1cm LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED 16 False garlic 2 Nothoscordum bivalve Alliaceae (Onion family) QUICK flowers CHECK: All leaves basal; a single scape hearing an umbel of with 6 petals. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Polycarpic perennial. Bulbs globular or egg shaped to bulging, especially when large, 0.3-0.9" (8-23 mm) wide, the larger ones amorphous with and scale-like offset bulbs. Leaves 3-7, all basal, wrapped in a sheath for 1-2" (2.5-5 small. above blunt and the bulb, the blades to 15" (38 cm) long and 2-5 mm wide, shallowly U-channeled, cm) not thin. Scapes 6-16" (15-40 cm) tall, single, erect, straight, solid, smooth, hairless. cound nollow, to the tips angled. Inflorescence a single terminal umbel of 5-12 with 2 brown, papery, triangular, pointed bracts beneath slightly it, the pedicels ascending and unequal, 1.5-2.2" (3.8-5.6 cm) long. Flowers (mostly spring but orr asionally through summer and often in fall) have 6 long-elliptic, blunt pointed, white tepals 9-13 mm long arranged 2 layers of 3, each with a prominent center vein (on the outside this vein is yellow-green at the base but often purplish toward the tip); stamens 6. Fruit a 3-part capsule, egg-shaped, wider at the tip (which 15 etimes flattened), 3-5 mm wide and 6-10 mm long, turning light brown upon drying and splitting into boat-shased valves holding angular, rough, black seeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: Star-of-Bethlehem (p. 666) is shorter with very slimy sap. The leaves have a whitisn center stripe and the flowers are in a short raceme. HABITAT: Full to partial sun with moderately rich soil of medium moisture, especially where disturbed. Lawns, roadsides, parks, mead- OWS, high floodplains, savan- nahs, sparse forests and edges. Native. FOOD USE: Bulbs can be col- lected at any time and eaten cooked. They have a faint garlic flavor. Conservation 3. COMMENTS: At the moment of writing I have eaten these bulbs on four occasions, in greater quantity each time (in the last instance a quarter cup). Archeological evidence suggests that false garlic was once an important food in some regions. This species was for- merly classified in the genus Allium, and the differences by which it is separated are minor The garlic flavor is faint but evi- dent when you eat the bulbs. Though common in lawns. this plant is much smaller there than in unmowed grassy areas AKA crow poison. but you won have muc luck poisoning crows with it The name crow poison" IS thrown as a number of remotely similar plants such as Amianthium must się views which is as tuany poisonous 259 