LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
3
3
Seaside arrow-grass
family
Juncaginaceae
Triglochin CHECK: Clumps maritima of thick, narrow, erect leaves 2. with a long sheath at the base;
QUICK spike-like top. ID difficulty
DESCRIPTION: unbranched scape Perennial with a forming clumps from clumps; a thick root in open crown. coastal In bogs, habitats fens, cm) it and is
marshes it is taller and grows singly clumps. or Leaves in small all basal, two-ranked, with 8-22" pointed (20-56 tips,
long, shorter erect but to often leaning, grows thick in dense and spongy-fleshy, hairless, shallowly very channeled narrow in the lower part but near conspicuous the top they
mostly plump, spongy and inside may with be almost thin outer rounded. walls, The leaves are not visibly cluster. veined Stems and 10-38" have (25-97 a cm) tall,
are not channeled third to half clasping the inner adjacent leaves of the (Stem shoots are solid at first.)
sheath on the and lower unbranched, hollow, slightly flattened on one side, often curvy. with numerous small, unshowy
erect, thin comprising the upper 35-50% of the scape, ridge along
Inflorescence a spike-like mm, raceme the space between them decreasing toward the top. There is a narrow stigmas. Fruit a
flowers on below pedicels each 2-5 pedicel. Flowers 3-4 mm across, green, with 6 tiny tepals and and purple base.
the cylindrical rachis or urn-shaped capsule with 3-6 fuzzy, outward-pointing lobes at the tip
PLANTS: Marsh arrow-grass T. polustre (edibility unknown) is much smaller with rounded); a 3-lobed
fruit. CONFUSING Seaside plantain has shorter and broader leaves that are brittle and flat or channeled (but not
it flowers in a true spike that is much shorter and more crowded.
HABITAT: Most abundant in coastal wetlands. Also found on lakeshores. river banks, pond margins, calcare-
ous bogs and fens, brackish wetlands; in full
sun. Needs dissolved mineral salts. Native.
FOOD USE: In spring or early summer, pull
up the leaf cluster and eat the tender, inner,
white heart enclosed by sheaths. Shoots of
flower stalks are also edible. Nibble these
parts raw or add them to salads, tacos,
salsa, or vegetable dishes. The pleasant
taste reminds me of cilantro, but is better
because it lacks the soapy flavor. Seeds are
reported as edible, but are tiny and hard to
separate; I've had no success. Conserva-
tion 2.
COMMENTS: In large quantities this plant
is known to have toxic effects on livestock,
but this seems irrelevant to human culinary
use. The leaf bases are traditionally eaten
and relished by several Indigenous groups.
(top left) Spring shoot of a bog specimen.
(top middle) Tall spike of a bog specimen.
(below right) Growing on a rocky sea beach.
Hearts
260
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED 3 3 Seaside arrow-grass family Juncaginaceae Triglochin CHECK: Clumps maritima of thick, narrow, erect leaves 2. with a long sheath at the base; QUICK spike-like top. ID difficulty DESCRIPTION: unbranched scape Perennial with a forming clumps from clumps; a thick root in open crown. coastal In bogs, habitats fens, cm) it and is marshes it is taller and grows singly clumps. or Leaves in small all basal, two-ranked, with 8-22" pointed (20-56 tips, long, shorter erect but to often leaning, grows thick in dense and spongy-fleshy, hairless, shallowly very channeled narrow in the lower part but near conspicuous the top they mostly plump, spongy and inside may with be almost thin outer rounded. walls, The leaves are not visibly cluster. veined Stems and 10-38" have (25-97 a cm) tall, are not channeled third to half clasping the inner adjacent leaves of the (Stem shoots are solid at first.) sheath on the and lower unbranched, hollow, slightly flattened on one side, often curvy. with numerous small, unshowy erect, thin comprising the upper 35-50% of the scape, ridge along Inflorescence a spike-like mm, raceme the space between them decreasing toward the top. There is a narrow stigmas. Fruit a flowers on below pedicels each 2-5 pedicel. Flowers 3-4 mm across, green, with 6 tiny tepals and and purple base. the cylindrical rachis or urn-shaped capsule with 3-6 fuzzy, outward-pointing lobes at the tip PLANTS: Marsh arrow-grass T. polustre (edibility unknown) is much smaller with rounded); a 3-lobed fruit. CONFUSING Seaside plantain has shorter and broader leaves that are brittle and flat or channeled (but not it flowers in a true spike that is much shorter and more crowded. HABITAT: Most abundant in coastal wetlands. Also found on lakeshores. river banks, pond margins, calcare- ous bogs and fens, brackish wetlands; in full sun. Needs dissolved mineral salts. Native. FOOD USE: In spring or early summer, pull up the leaf cluster and eat the tender, inner, white heart enclosed by sheaths. Shoots of flower stalks are also edible. Nibble these parts raw or add them to salads, tacos, salsa, or vegetable dishes. The pleasant taste reminds me of cilantro, but is better because it lacks the soapy flavor. Seeds are reported as edible, but are tiny and hard to separate; I've had no success. Conserva- tion 2. COMMENTS: In large quantities this plant is known to have toxic effects on livestock, but this seems irrelevant to human culinary use. The leaf bases are traditionally eaten and relished by several Indigenous groups. (top left) Spring shoot of a bog specimen. (top middle) Tall spike of a bog specimen. (below right) Growing on a rocky sea beach. Hearts 260 