mm
0
1cm
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
Grape hyacinth
genus Muscari Asparagaceae (Asparagus family)
QUICK ID: Short spring ephemeral with linear leaves and dense racemes of drogning
roundish, purple flowers. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Bulb to 1" (2.5 cm) long, teardrop shaped, symmetrical,
smooth with a papery, light-brown skin, whitish inside. Leaves all basal, 5-8 on flowering
specimens, to 14" (36 cm) long and 11 mm wide, thick, semi-succulent and somewhat slimy,
broadly U-shaped in cross section, whitish and channeled at the base. The underside has
numerous small ridges, but the top is smooth and lacks these. The surface is hairless with a faint bioom the
surface. Scape 6-14" (15-36 cm) tall and 2-4 mm thick (thicker toward the top), round, solid. sm ooth. hairless. on
not ridged, strictly leafless (no bracts or scales). Inflorescence a dense terminal raceme 1-3 (2.5-8 cm) long.
of 20-40 flowers, the pedicels 6-9 mm, each with a tiny bristle underneath. Flowers nodding, um or agg-
shaped, 4-7 mm long, purple, with a constricted, often whitish opening at the end with 6 tiny recurved lobes
The surface is hairless, smooth while blooming but becoming grooved or pleated before falling off There is
a faint grape-like smell. The sexual parts are hidden deep inside the urn; the inside often appears star like.
Fruit a 3-part capsule containing 6 seeds.
SPECIES: The genus is easy to recognize, but the species are hard to differentiate. The most common feral
species in our region are M. botryoides, M. armeniacum, and M. neglectum. The differences are subtle. and
the food uses similar.
HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in full sun to moderate shade. Lawns, meadows, waste areas, forest edges and
woodlots in urban areas or near old homesteads. Introduced.
CONFUSING PLANTS: This plant is hard to tell from Star-of-Bethlehem (p. 666) unless in bloom, and the
two often grow together, but the SOB has slimier, narrower leaves. Flowering grape hyacinth is unmistakable.
FOOD USE: Bulbs are extremely bitter and somewhat toxic when raw. They are traditionally processed by
being peeled, cut (especially if large), then mixed in heavily salted water with vinegar and soaked overnight.
After this they can be cooked or pickled if they no longer taste bitter. If they are still bitter they should be boiled
and drained. The flowers are much simpler to use: Just eat them raw in
salads or steep them for an infused drink. They are pretty but don't taste
very good either.
COMMENTS: The fresh bulbs are terrible, but hungry European peasants
long ago figured out how to make them palatable. The plant is remarkably after
widespread because it is grown ornamentally; although persisting
escape, it spreads slowly and rarely becomes a problematic invasive.
201
mm 0 1cm LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED Grape hyacinth genus Muscari Asparagaceae (Asparagus family) QUICK ID: Short spring ephemeral with linear leaves and dense racemes of drogning roundish, purple flowers. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Bulb to 1" (2.5 cm) long, teardrop shaped, symmetrical, smooth with a papery, light-brown skin, whitish inside. Leaves all basal, 5-8 on flowering specimens, to 14" (36 cm) long and 11 mm wide, thick, semi-succulent and somewhat slimy, broadly U-shaped in cross section, whitish and channeled at the base. The underside has numerous small ridges, but the top is smooth and lacks these. The surface is hairless with a faint bioom the surface. Scape 6-14" (15-36 cm) tall and 2-4 mm thick (thicker toward the top), round, solid. sm ooth. hairless. on not ridged, strictly leafless (no bracts or scales). Inflorescence a dense terminal raceme 1-3 (2.5-8 cm) long. of 20-40 flowers, the pedicels 6-9 mm, each with a tiny bristle underneath. Flowers nodding, um or agg- shaped, 4-7 mm long, purple, with a constricted, often whitish opening at the end with 6 tiny recurved lobes The surface is hairless, smooth while blooming but becoming grooved or pleated before falling off There is a faint grape-like smell. The sexual parts are hidden deep inside the urn; the inside often appears star like. Fruit a 3-part capsule containing 6 seeds. SPECIES: The genus is easy to recognize, but the species are hard to differentiate. The most common feral species in our region are M. botryoides, M. armeniacum, and M. neglectum. The differences are subtle. and the food uses similar. HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in full sun to moderate shade. Lawns, meadows, waste areas, forest edges and woodlots in urban areas or near old homesteads. Introduced. CONFUSING PLANTS: This plant is hard to tell from Star-of-Bethlehem (p. 666) unless in bloom, and the two often grow together, but the SOB has slimier, narrower leaves. Flowering grape hyacinth is unmistakable. FOOD USE: Bulbs are extremely bitter and somewhat toxic when raw. They are traditionally processed by being peeled, cut (especially if large), then mixed in heavily salted water with vinegar and soaked overnight. After this they can be cooked or pickled if they no longer taste bitter. If they are still bitter they should be boiled and drained. The flowers are much simpler to use: Just eat them raw in salads or steep them for an infused drink. They are pretty but don't taste very good either. COMMENTS: The fresh bulbs are terrible, but hungry European peasants long ago figured out how to make them palatable. The plant is remarkably after widespread because it is grown ornamentally; although persisting escape, it spreads slowly and rarely becomes a problematic invasive. 201 