Camas Camassia 3 3 Asparagacede 2 (Asparagus leafless family) scape
10 genus CHECK: Long. thin leaves, whitish-blue basal only, flowers keeled with in 6 the petals. lower ID part; difficulty symmetrical, 3.
DESCRIPTION: with QUICK a (ong raceme Perennial of teardrop-shaped, blue to spring ephemeral. 0.5-1.7" (13-43 Bulbs mm) 2-5" papery, (5-13 in diameter, layered cm) deep, skin. layered, Leaves becoming the 3-14, flesh
Western camas
whitish, spherical hard, hairless, to slightly and smooth erect to but ascending covered with with the a thin, keeled tips dark, limp, in the scrolled distal near third, 0.2-0.7" the faintly base to (5-18 strongly mm)
in blue; Eastern
and prairie
channeled keeled all basal, in the with proximal reflexed part. cm) edges, They long, flat are linear, to often weakly tough, flipped thick, upside-down. sharp, slightly often fleshy, Blades brown. faintly Torn glaucous leaves diameter, show with
camas in purple;
Eastern camas
only in green.
wide and 9-20" (23-50 tips long-tapered, height, 2-5 mm in
faint numerous threads. small Scapes parallel 12-40" veins, (especially (30-100 the cm) near tall, the thin base), for erect, their Shoots unbranched, have cone-like round in clusters cross of flower early buds summer, equal with
long, section smooth, whiskery but hairless, often bracts with glaucous pressed ascending, one flat over spot, 30-40% them. solid, Inflorescence of rigid, flower the length. sap a long slimy. Beneath raceme the of pedicel 12-80 flowers there may in spring be a bract to roughly
most
pedicels
slightly
to its length, broad at
the base but abruptly
narrowing to thread-
like. Flowers 0,4-0.9"
(10-23 mm) across, blue
or sometimes nearly
white, with 6 tepais that
are elliptic and blunt or
abruptly pointed. At
bloom, tepals are about
3 times as long as wide,
but the edges soon dry
and curl inward, making
them appear much nar-
rower. The ovary is elon-
gated and yellow. Fruit
a triangular or 3-part
capsule 0,4-0.7" (10-
18 mm) long, containing
many black seeds.
SPECIES: Two in our
region, both native:
thriving in rich, mildly
disturbed soil.
Eastern camas C. scil-
loides inhabits wood-
lands, nut savannahs,
and prairies, especially
on slopes, upper flood-
plains, and rocky hill-
tops. The leaves are
typically more keeled,
the flowers are pal-
er, and there are few
bracts in the influres
rence. AKA Atlantic
camas wild hyacinth
dr
262
Fastern carnas: (lop left) Shout (top middle) In a prairie area, just beginning to flower.
right) Pods. (bottom) In wooded habitat.
Camas Camassia 3 3 Asparagacede 2 (Asparagus leafless family) scape 10 genus CHECK: Long. thin leaves, whitish-blue basal only, flowers keeled with in 6 the petals. lower ID part; difficulty symmetrical, 3. DESCRIPTION: with QUICK a (ong raceme Perennial of teardrop-shaped, blue to spring ephemeral. 0.5-1.7" (13-43 Bulbs mm) 2-5" papery, (5-13 in diameter, layered cm) deep, skin. layered, Leaves becoming the 3-14, flesh Western camas whitish, spherical hard, hairless, to slightly and smooth erect to but ascending covered with with the a thin, keeled tips dark, limp, in the scrolled distal near third, 0.2-0.7" the faintly base to (5-18 strongly mm) in blue; Eastern and prairie channeled keeled all basal, in the with proximal reflexed part. cm) edges, They long, flat are linear, to often weakly tough, flipped thick, upside-down. sharp, slightly often fleshy, Blades brown. faintly Torn glaucous leaves diameter, show with camas in purple; Eastern camas only in green. wide and 9-20" (23-50 tips long-tapered, height, 2-5 mm in faint numerous threads. small Scapes parallel 12-40" veins, (especially (30-100 the cm) near tall, the thin base), for erect, their Shoots unbranched, have cone-like round in clusters cross of flower early buds summer, equal with long, section smooth, whiskery but hairless, often bracts with glaucous pressed ascending, one flat over spot, 30-40% them. solid, Inflorescence of rigid, flower the length. sap a long slimy. Beneath raceme the of pedicel 12-80 flowers there may in spring be a bract to roughly most pedicels slightly to its length, broad at the base but abruptly narrowing to thread- like. Flowers 0,4-0.9" (10-23 mm) across, blue or sometimes nearly white, with 6 tepais that are elliptic and blunt or abruptly pointed. At bloom, tepals are about 3 times as long as wide, but the edges soon dry and curl inward, making them appear much nar- rower. The ovary is elon- gated and yellow. Fruit a triangular or 3-part capsule 0,4-0.7" (10- 18 mm) long, containing many black seeds. SPECIES: Two in our region, both native: thriving in rich, mildly disturbed soil. Eastern camas C. scil- loides inhabits wood- lands, nut savannahs, and prairies, especially on slopes, upper flood- plains, and rocky hill- tops. The leaves are typically more keeled, the flowers are pal- er, and there are few bracts in the influres rence. AKA Atlantic camas wild hyacinth dr 262 Fastern carnas: (lop left) Shout (top middle) In a prairie area, just beginning to flower. right) Pods. (bottom) In wooded habitat. 