vm
[1
1cm
LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED
Prairie flowers camas bearing C. angusta bracts is a tallgrass prairie species, larger in all respec with
protected in most many of its in the inflorescence and blooming about a month later This plant clarlyny If, blue and
range and should not be gathered under normal irr umstance
ONFUSING flowers, PLANTS: and Death camasses (p. 665) have a few stem leaves (but only on plants with
white always have keeled or deeply V-falded leaves Death camas bulns have A strong a steml). bitter
flavor, giving you one last chance to spit out your mistake if you somehow mess up
FOOD USE: Bulbs can be dug any time, but it is best to do 50 just after flowering in early surnmer 30 the
plant can be identified more readily. Bulbs should be baked or steamed for a prolonged per od? preferably 12
hours or longer) to break their undigestible starches down into simple sugars-this renders them sweet and
delicious, like a cross between cooked persimmon and sweet potatoes. Shoots and greens ar be eaten 15 7
vegetable raw or cooked in spring. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: Our camasses were probably once managed staple crops just like their western relatives The
eastern species is ideal for growing in the herbaceous layer of a nut forest managed by fire. Because they nhabit
rich soils camasses have lost most of their haunts to agriculture (and most of the rest to fire suppression).
Eastern camas in forest. with tender young
Prairie camas (top) and eastern camas (lower left) bulbs.
leaves that have been nipped by deer.
(left)
Prairie
camas
rosette.
(right)
Prairie
camas
263
vm [1 1cm LINEAR, ENTIRE LEAVES-NOT ONION-SCENTED Prairie flowers camas bearing C. angusta bracts is a tallgrass prairie species, larger in all respec with protected in most many of its in the inflorescence and blooming about a month later This plant clarlyny If, blue and range and should not be gathered under normal irr umstance ONFUSING flowers, PLANTS: and Death camasses (p. 665) have a few stem leaves (but only on plants with white always have keeled or deeply V-falded leaves Death camas bulns have A strong a steml). bitter flavor, giving you one last chance to spit out your mistake if you somehow mess up FOOD USE: Bulbs can be dug any time, but it is best to do 50 just after flowering in early surnmer 30 the plant can be identified more readily. Bulbs should be baked or steamed for a prolonged per od? preferably 12 hours or longer) to break their undigestible starches down into simple sugars-this renders them sweet and delicious, like a cross between cooked persimmon and sweet potatoes. Shoots and greens ar be eaten 15 7 vegetable raw or cooked in spring. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: Our camasses were probably once managed staple crops just like their western relatives The eastern species is ideal for growing in the herbaceous layer of a nut forest managed by fire. Because they nhabit rich soils camasses have lost most of their haunts to agriculture (and most of the rest to fire suppression). Eastern camas in forest. with tender young Prairie camas (top) and eastern camas (lower left) bulbs. leaves that have been nipped by deer. (left) Prairie camas rosette. (right) Prairie camas 263 