0
1cm
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE
yellow, both and red-brown. Pods about 8" long,
from ends, formed by 6 tions of 2 different sizes. narrow droping at
the stem beginning in late summer
HABITAT: Rich hardwood forests Native.
FOOD USE: The corms can be eaten cooked or raw. The
flavor is mild, starchy, and pleasant, but the texture IS very
pasty and sticky (like Elmer's paste without the minty flavor)
Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: This plant has an unusual life cycle: It has a single leaf through the fall, winter. and spring,
which takes advantage of the long season of available sunlight while the forest canopy lacks leaves. The
plant stores this energy in its bulb, which fuels flowering in summer when the leaf has withered away. This
long-lived perennial reproduces slowly and is killed when the bulb is dug; it should be collected sparingly and
judiciously if at all, AKA Adam-and-Eve.
2 Cranefly orchid
2
Tipularia discolor
Orchidaceae (Orchid family)
QUICK CHECK: Single, broadly ovate leaf, folded along several prominent parallel veins,
dark purple underneath; long raceme of cranefly-like flowers. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Winter perennial with a single basal leaf withering in spring. Tubers in
chains of 3-5, each about 1" (2.5 cm) long, white, with little to no rhizome between them.
The surface is smooth except for 1 or 2 ring-like scars and an occasional bud or bud scar. The
most recent tuber is the largest and firmest, while those behind it are progressively softer.
Roots are borne only at the narrow points between tubers. Leaf 2.5-4" (6-10 long, leathery, broadly ovate
to heart-shaped with a pointed tip, entire, with the margins curled near the base. The veins are parallel. with
the midvein very prominent. There are 2 prominent veins on each side of the midvein, and the blade is creased along
them. The upper surface is green with small, dark, raised blotches; the lower surface is deep purple. Petiole roughly
equal to the blade, finely mottled with purple, hairless, and triangular with sharp corners. it is not channeled
at the base, but is in the upper third-becoming deeply and narrowly 50 just below the blade. Stems erect,
rounded, hairless, thin, 10-26" (25-66 cm) tall, unbranched, appearing in midsummer. LYDS often prominent
with drooping fruit still attached (see photo). Inflorescence a raceme 5-9" (13-23 cm) long, containing twisted. 16-40
purple-green to dull yellow-orange flowers, the rachis finely ridged, the pedicels flattened, ridged, resemble di
Flowers (18 cm) across, a mixture of light mottled maroon and yellowish; they are said to the lip
cranefly, 0.7" with long, narrow, petal-like parts, plus a lip petal with 3 lobes, the middle one elongated: mm long.
has a long, tubular 5 spur extending backward from it. Fruit a hanging, elliptic capsule 10-12
HABITAT: Dry to moderately dry oak, hickory, and pine forests. Native.
FOOD USE: Harder tubers can be cooked and eaten, but this should be done sparingly, as the plant repro-
duces slowly. Conservation 3.
0 1cm FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE yellow, both and red-brown. Pods about 8" long, from ends, formed by 6 tions of 2 different sizes. narrow droping at the stem beginning in late summer HABITAT: Rich hardwood forests Native. FOOD USE: The corms can be eaten cooked or raw. The flavor is mild, starchy, and pleasant, but the texture IS very pasty and sticky (like Elmer's paste without the minty flavor) Conservation 3. COMMENTS: This plant has an unusual life cycle: It has a single leaf through the fall, winter. and spring, which takes advantage of the long season of available sunlight while the forest canopy lacks leaves. The plant stores this energy in its bulb, which fuels flowering in summer when the leaf has withered away. This long-lived perennial reproduces slowly and is killed when the bulb is dug; it should be collected sparingly and judiciously if at all, AKA Adam-and-Eve. 2 Cranefly orchid 2 Tipularia discolor Orchidaceae (Orchid family) QUICK CHECK: Single, broadly ovate leaf, folded along several prominent parallel veins, dark purple underneath; long raceme of cranefly-like flowers. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Winter perennial with a single basal leaf withering in spring. Tubers in chains of 3-5, each about 1" (2.5 cm) long, white, with little to no rhizome between them. The surface is smooth except for 1 or 2 ring-like scars and an occasional bud or bud scar. The most recent tuber is the largest and firmest, while those behind it are progressively softer. Roots are borne only at the narrow points between tubers. Leaf 2.5-4" (6-10 long, leathery, broadly ovate to heart-shaped with a pointed tip, entire, with the margins curled near the base. The veins are parallel. with the midvein very prominent. There are 2 prominent veins on each side of the midvein, and the blade is creased along them. The upper surface is green with small, dark, raised blotches; the lower surface is deep purple. Petiole roughly equal to the blade, finely mottled with purple, hairless, and triangular with sharp corners. it is not channeled at the base, but is in the upper third-becoming deeply and narrowly 50 just below the blade. Stems erect, rounded, hairless, thin, 10-26" (25-66 cm) tall, unbranched, appearing in midsummer. LYDS often prominent with drooping fruit still attached (see photo). Inflorescence a raceme 5-9" (13-23 cm) long, containing twisted. 16-40 purple-green to dull yellow-orange flowers, the rachis finely ridged, the pedicels flattened, ridged, resemble di Flowers (18 cm) across, a mixture of light mottled maroon and yellowish; they are said to the lip cranefly, 0.7" with long, narrow, petal-like parts, plus a lip petal with 3 lobes, the middle one elongated: mm long. has a long, tubular 5 spur extending backward from it. Fruit a hanging, elliptic capsule 10-12 HABITAT: Dry to moderately dry oak, hickory, and pine forests. Native. FOOD USE: Harder tubers can be cooked and eaten, but this should be done sparingly, as the plant repro- duces slowly. Conservation 3. 