FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE
18 FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES absence ENTIRE
of these GROUP plants may occasionally have the tiny vestigial may complicate leaves on identification, the leaves scape. are The but present. I have
A of few the scapes provide (or sufficient leaves) during detail to part identify of these year plants when only the
tried Otherwise to this group is rather easy to navigate.
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 18
The key is not your final answer!
1. Puttyroot
Leaf always single.
Leaf with 50-60 prominent whitish veins above.
2. Cranefly orchid
Leaf with 5-7 prominent dark veins above.
3. Wild ginger
or
Leaves always paired, on densely hairy petioles directly from the rhizome.
or
4. Trout lily
Leaves 1-3 per plant.
Leaves usually mottled, ephemeral, never hairy; single flower per scape.
5. Bluebead lily
or
Leaves not mottled, not ephemeral, margins hairy when young: flowers multiple.
Leaves in rosettes of usually 5 or more.
6. Skunk cabbage
Most leaves over 14" (36 cm) long, stinky when broken, veins white below.
Leaves generally less than 14" long, not stinky.
7. Mountain sorrel
Major veins palmate and depressed above.
or
Major veins flat or raised above.
8. Shooting star
Veins mostly raised; scape minutely woolly or smooth, solid.
or
Veins flat; scape hallow, densely covered with erect hairs. Swamp saxifrage (p. 284).
Major veins parallel and depressed above.
9. Common plantain
Blade blunt-tipped, 60-90% as broad as long.
10. Narrow-leaf plantain
Blade pointed, 15-30% as broad as long.
1
Puttyroot
2
Aplectrum hyemale Orchidaceae (Orchid family)
QUICK CHECK: A single, dry, broadly elliptic, pleated leaf with numerous silver-white
parallel veins; no leaf at flowering time. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Winter perennial with a single leaf from fall through spring. Corm nearly
spherical, about 1" (2.5 cm) across, white, hard, smooth except for 2 circular scars, one
in the middle and one near the base. There is an old, dry sheath attached to the base and
each scar, but not encircling the corm. A bud about 1.4" (3.5 cm) long is present when the stalk is absent. The
pervious year's spent corm is often attached, or next year's new corm is forming. Leaf 5-8" (13-20 cm) long,
broadly elliptic, tough and dry, wrinkly, hairless, green above with a faint purple tint below. The midvein and
5 other prominent veins protrude on the underside; the leaf is keeled
or folded along each of these, The upper surface has numerous (about
60) whitish, raised, parallel veins. Petiole about 50% of blade length,
thick, roughly triangular but with 4 unequal grooves, the largest one in
the center of the top side. The edges of the lower blade cur! in and
meet to form an enclosed channel; these edges fuse to create a hollow
petiole. There is a distinct ring where the leaf base attaches to the
petiole. The petiole is whitish near the base, purple distally. Stalks
are produced in late spring or early summer, when leaves are absent.
They are unbranched, erect, 12-22" (30-56 tall and 5-7 mm thick,
rounded, Inflorescence hairless, the lower portion covered by a long leafy sheath.
mer) about 12 mm, arched, strongly grooved, twisted. Flowers the
pedicels 8 a sparse raceme of 4-16, the rachis wavy or zigzag,
white tip, cm long, irregular in form, with 2 arching petals (sum-
plus 3 spreading sepals, the floral parts a mixture of green, and a
264
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE 18 FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES absence ENTIRE of these GROUP plants may occasionally have the tiny vestigial may complicate leaves on identification, the leaves scape. are The but present. I have A of few the scapes provide (or sufficient leaves) during detail to part identify of these year plants when only the tried Otherwise to this group is rather easy to navigate. TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 18 The key is not your final answer! 1. Puttyroot Leaf always single. Leaf with 50-60 prominent whitish veins above. 2. Cranefly orchid Leaf with 5-7 prominent dark veins above. 3. Wild ginger or Leaves always paired, on densely hairy petioles directly from the rhizome. or 4. Trout lily Leaves 1-3 per plant. Leaves usually mottled, ephemeral, never hairy; single flower per scape. 5. Bluebead lily or Leaves not mottled, not ephemeral, margins hairy when young: flowers multiple. Leaves in rosettes of usually 5 or more. 6. Skunk cabbage Most leaves over 14" (36 cm) long, stinky when broken, veins white below. Leaves generally less than 14" long, not stinky. 7. Mountain sorrel Major veins palmate and depressed above. or Major veins flat or raised above. 8. Shooting star Veins mostly raised; scape minutely woolly or smooth, solid. or Veins flat; scape hallow, densely covered with erect hairs. Swamp saxifrage (p. 284). Major veins parallel and depressed above. 9. Common plantain Blade blunt-tipped, 60-90% as broad as long. 10. Narrow-leaf plantain Blade pointed, 15-30% as broad as long. 1 Puttyroot 2 Aplectrum hyemale Orchidaceae (Orchid family) QUICK CHECK: A single, dry, broadly elliptic, pleated leaf with numerous silver-white parallel veins; no leaf at flowering time. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Winter perennial with a single leaf from fall through spring. Corm nearly spherical, about 1" (2.5 cm) across, white, hard, smooth except for 2 circular scars, one in the middle and one near the base. There is an old, dry sheath attached to the base and each scar, but not encircling the corm. A bud about 1.4" (3.5 cm) long is present when the stalk is absent. The pervious year's spent corm is often attached, or next year's new corm is forming. Leaf 5-8" (13-20 cm) long, broadly elliptic, tough and dry, wrinkly, hairless, green above with a faint purple tint below. The midvein and 5 other prominent veins protrude on the underside; the leaf is keeled or folded along each of these, The upper surface has numerous (about 60) whitish, raised, parallel veins. Petiole about 50% of blade length, thick, roughly triangular but with 4 unequal grooves, the largest one in the center of the top side. The edges of the lower blade cur! in and meet to form an enclosed channel; these edges fuse to create a hollow petiole. There is a distinct ring where the leaf base attaches to the petiole. The petiole is whitish near the base, purple distally. Stalks are produced in late spring or early summer, when leaves are absent. They are unbranched, erect, 12-22" (30-56 tall and 5-7 mm thick, rounded, Inflorescence hairless, the lower portion covered by a long leafy sheath. mer) about 12 mm, arched, strongly grooved, twisted. Flowers the pedicels 8 a sparse raceme of 4-16, the rachis wavy or zigzag, white tip, cm long, irregular in form, with 2 arching petals (sum- plus 3 spreading sepals, the floral parts a mixture of green, and a 264 