FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE
3
Asarum Wild ginger canadense family Aristolochiaceae
QUICK CHECK: Large. paired, heart-shaped leaves on thick, very hairy petioles from
a surface rhizome. ID difficulty 2. herb, often forming dense colonies by creeping rhizome.
DESCRIPTION: Low growing perennial roundish but sometimes with a slight ridge, 3-6" (8-15 cm)
Rhizomes 7-9 or mm below thick, the dull soil green, surface. Leaves in pairs from the with rhizome, 2 large rounded lobes
directly and on about just equally wide, heart to kidney-shaped, the and base covered with scattered stiff hair;
the
underside
is
and long a deep sinus. and hairier. The upper Veins surface palmate, is very deeply dark depressed green above and on protruding Petioles below, stout, looping channeled, together straight, well
lighter green highlighted by white hairs top. toward the base.
erect, typically slightly borne a peduncle 0.5-2" (1.3-5 inside white with
before reaching the margins, longer sometimes than the blade, densely covered with long white cm) long hairs directly that lean from the rhizome
Inflorescence (spring) and single often flowers well hidden. Flowers on bell or urn-like, to 0.8" (2 cm) long, the (25-38 mm) wide,
between the leaves There are 3 densely hairy, recurved, long-pointed lobes spreading at 1-1.5" the end.
greenish a maroon on pentagon. the back and maroon from the front. Fruit a fleshy capsule with a calyx
PLANTS: Members of the related genus Hexastylis, common in similar habitats of the people South- as
CONFUSING look similar but lack the long, spreading lobes on the flower. These plants are used by some with wild
wild east, is used, but I advise against this (see warning). Certain asters are sometimes confused the thick
ginger, ginger but their leaves are longer than wide, thinner, and typically grow in rosettes. Asters lack
surface rhizome and have very different flowers.
HABITAT: Hardwood forests with rich soil, especially slopes. Native.
FOOD USE: The rhizomes can be used sparingly as a seasoning any time of year. Strong flavor resembles
ginger but also suggests cardamom. It is slow growing and easily overharvested, so gather with care. Con-
servation 3.
WARNING: This plant contains aris-
tolochic acid, a renal toxin and potential
carcinogen. If used, it should be ingested
occasionally and in small amounts.
COMMENTS: This attractive herb is well
known to wildcrafters and naturalists. It
often grows on steep slopes where you
could fall down and ginger yourself. It is
not related to cultivated ginger.
266
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE 3 Asarum Wild ginger canadense family Aristolochiaceae QUICK CHECK: Large. paired, heart-shaped leaves on thick, very hairy petioles from a surface rhizome. ID difficulty 2. herb, often forming dense colonies by creeping rhizome. DESCRIPTION: Low growing perennial roundish but sometimes with a slight ridge, 3-6" (8-15 cm) Rhizomes 7-9 or mm below thick, the dull soil green, surface. Leaves in pairs from the with rhizome, 2 large rounded lobes directly and on about just equally wide, heart to kidney-shaped, the and base covered with scattered stiff hair; the underside is and long a deep sinus. and hairier. The upper Veins surface palmate, is very deeply dark depressed green above and on protruding Petioles below, stout, looping channeled, together straight, well lighter green highlighted by white hairs top. toward the base. erect, typically slightly borne a peduncle 0.5-2" (1.3-5 inside white with before reaching the margins, longer sometimes than the blade, densely covered with long white cm) long hairs directly that lean from the rhizome Inflorescence (spring) and single often flowers well hidden. Flowers on bell or urn-like, to 0.8" (2 cm) long, the (25-38 mm) wide, between the leaves There are 3 densely hairy, recurved, long-pointed lobes spreading at 1-1.5" the end. greenish a maroon on pentagon. the back and maroon from the front. Fruit a fleshy capsule with a calyx PLANTS: Members of the related genus Hexastylis, common in similar habitats of the people South- as CONFUSING look similar but lack the long, spreading lobes on the flower. These plants are used by some with wild wild east, is used, but I advise against this (see warning). Certain asters are sometimes confused the thick ginger, ginger but their leaves are longer than wide, thinner, and typically grow in rosettes. Asters lack surface rhizome and have very different flowers. HABITAT: Hardwood forests with rich soil, especially slopes. Native. FOOD USE: The rhizomes can be used sparingly as a seasoning any time of year. Strong flavor resembles ginger but also suggests cardamom. It is slow growing and easily overharvested, so gather with care. Con- servation 3. WARNING: This plant contains aris- tolochic acid, a renal toxin and potential carcinogen. If used, it should be ingested occasionally and in small amounts. COMMENTS: This attractive herb is well known to wildcrafters and naturalists. It often grows on steep slopes where you could fall down and ginger yourself. It is not related to cultivated ginger. 266 