Aristolochiaceae
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE
4
Trout lily
3
2
NG-75
genus Erythronium
Liliaceae
(Lily
family)
QUICK 6 CHECK: 1-3 entire, broad, hairless, mottled leaves, single nadding
long petals on a short scape, ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: 0.6" Perennials. Bulbs teardrop-shaped, not layered inside, whitish.
(1.5 cm) long, with roots in a tuft at the bottom. Non-flowering bulbs up to
plant clonal bulbs nearby through a worm-like structure called a "dropper." Leaves sometimes 1
all basal, 3-7" (8-18 cm) long and about 1/3 as wide, long-elliptic to obovate, tapered at 3,
the base and pointed at the tip, hairless with entire margins. There are no conspicuous
Collective
range
veins, but the blade is gently creased along the middle. Leaves are mottled with green and
of the genus
maroon when they first appear; this fades with age but usually not completely. Scape 4-8"
Frythronm
(10-20 cm) tall and 2-3 mm thick, hairless, unbranched, nodding at the apex with a single flower present or
only a minority of plants. Flowers 1.2-2" (3-5 cm) across, nodding to drooping, with 6 separate annervare
tepals, yellow or white, recurved when open. There is a single pistil and 6 stamens with long, dans ar them
Flowers close at night or when cloudy. Fruit a green, 3-part, elliptic to egg-shaped pod 0,4-09 in your
long, with a thin beak almost as long as the fruit.
SPECIES: E. americanum and E. rostratum both have yellow flowers and are found in hardwood forests with
rich soil. E. albidum has white flowers and somewhat smaller leaves; it grows in rich soil in forests and pper
floodplains. E. mesochoreum
has white flowers and much narrower unmottled or scarcely mottled leaves.
It lives in prairies or savannahs with moderately moist soils. The bulbs of this species are larger than those
of our others. All species native.
FOOD USE: Bulbs can be eaten at any time. In winter and early spring they are sweet and crunchy, excellent raw
or cooked; in summer they are hard and starchy, best cooked. Bulbs are found1-5" below the surface Flarge ones
deeper than small ones. Young leaves are nibbled raw or mixed with other cooked greens. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: Trout lily bulbs are delicious but unfortunately very labor-intensive to gather due to their
small size, which prevented them from becoming staple foods like E. grandiflorum of the Mountain We The
leaves are not ethnographically documented as a food source but are popular with some foragers today Eat-
ing flowers gives some people an unpleasant burning in the mouth. Trout lily seeds contain an oily chunk of
stuff on the outside, called an elaiosome, which ants eat, dispersing the seeds. AKA fawn Tily, dogtooth VIO at
(top left) White trout my
(top middle) rellow must
July flowers (topright)
Prame truit by leaf
(left) Trout hiv , ll
planting stem (dropper)
(right) Yellow
bulbs
201
Aristolochiaceae FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE 4 Trout lily 3 2 NG-75 genus Erythronium Liliaceae (Lily family) QUICK 6 CHECK: 1-3 entire, broad, hairless, mottled leaves, single nadding long petals on a short scape, ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: 0.6" Perennials. Bulbs teardrop-shaped, not layered inside, whitish. (1.5 cm) long, with roots in a tuft at the bottom. Non-flowering bulbs up to plant clonal bulbs nearby through a worm-like structure called a "dropper." Leaves sometimes 1 all basal, 3-7" (8-18 cm) long and about 1/3 as wide, long-elliptic to obovate, tapered at 3, the base and pointed at the tip, hairless with entire margins. There are no conspicuous Collective range veins, but the blade is gently creased along the middle. Leaves are mottled with green and of the genus maroon when they first appear; this fades with age but usually not completely. Scape 4-8" Frythronm (10-20 cm) tall and 2-3 mm thick, hairless, unbranched, nodding at the apex with a single flower present or only a minority of plants. Flowers 1.2-2" (3-5 cm) across, nodding to drooping, with 6 separate annervare tepals, yellow or white, recurved when open. There is a single pistil and 6 stamens with long, dans ar them Flowers close at night or when cloudy. Fruit a green, 3-part, elliptic to egg-shaped pod 0,4-09 in your long, with a thin beak almost as long as the fruit. SPECIES: E. americanum and E. rostratum both have yellow flowers and are found in hardwood forests with rich soil. E. albidum has white flowers and somewhat smaller leaves; it grows in rich soil in forests and pper floodplains. E. mesochoreum has white flowers and much narrower unmottled or scarcely mottled leaves. It lives in prairies or savannahs with moderately moist soils. The bulbs of this species are larger than those of our others. All species native. FOOD USE: Bulbs can be eaten at any time. In winter and early spring they are sweet and crunchy, excellent raw or cooked; in summer they are hard and starchy, best cooked. Bulbs are found1-5" below the surface Flarge ones deeper than small ones. Young leaves are nibbled raw or mixed with other cooked greens. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: Trout lily bulbs are delicious but unfortunately very labor-intensive to gather due to their small size, which prevented them from becoming staple foods like E. grandiflorum of the Mountain We The leaves are not ethnographically documented as a food source but are popular with some foragers today Eat- ing flowers gives some people an unpleasant burning in the mouth. Trout lily seeds contain an oily chunk of stuff on the outside, called an elaiosome, which ants eat, dispersing the seeds. AKA fawn Tily, dogtooth VIO at (top left) White trout my (top middle) rellow must July flowers (topright) Prame truit by leaf (left) Trout hiv , ll planting stem (dropper) (right) Yellow bulbs 201 