FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE
6 Skunk cabbage
Symplocarpus foetidus Araceae (Arum family)
QUICK CHECK: Rosettes of huge, entire, stinky, ovate leaves on long, sturdy Datioles
large, curved, maroon flowers come directly out of the mud. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a thick, short, unbranched taproot with numerous
fibrous side roots, the whole plant with a strong musky scent, all parts hairless. small,
a rosette of 4-7, ascending to erect (not ground-hugging), squeaky when manipulated. Leaves in
the new ones tightly scrolled. Blades ovate with abrupt, blunt tips, to 2' (60 cm) long,
very thin for their size, glossy, heart-shaped with the lobes curled. Margins entire but
often with tooth-like folds or waves. Veins and veinlets are depressed above and protruding below.
veins have a prominent white halo below. Secondary veins are numerous, spreading toward the margins at Mo fir
then gently curving toward the tip and approaching the margin gradually over a long path nearly parailel to
Petioles about 80% of blade length, to 1" (2.5 cm) thick and spongy, not hollow but with numerous tiny air Fill
tubes and string-like fibers distributed throughout, broadly U-channeled with paper-thin upper edges, gen
rounded below. Flowers emerge in very early spring directly out of the root crown at mud level and consist
a curving maroon hood about 3" (8 cm) long covering a bumpy club-like structure. This club matures into
egg-shaped cluster of roundish bean-like seeds 7-11 mm long in autumn.
HABITAT: Mucky swamps and wetland margins with rich soil, especially with spring water seepage. I
especially in high-calcium soils. Native.
WARNING: All parts contain calcium oxalate raphides and cannot be eaten before processing
FOOD USE: The large, starchy roots can be long-dried (weeks to years) or baked (many hours to several day
and then eaten. The youngest leaves can be eaten after similar processing. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: With a few thousand years of selective breeding to increase the size and eliminate the raphid
this might become a popular vegetable like taro.
20
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE 6 Skunk cabbage Symplocarpus foetidus Araceae (Arum family) QUICK CHECK: Rosettes of huge, entire, stinky, ovate leaves on long, sturdy Datioles large, curved, maroon flowers come directly out of the mud. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a thick, short, unbranched taproot with numerous fibrous side roots, the whole plant with a strong musky scent, all parts hairless. small, a rosette of 4-7, ascending to erect (not ground-hugging), squeaky when manipulated. Leaves in the new ones tightly scrolled. Blades ovate with abrupt, blunt tips, to 2' (60 cm) long, very thin for their size, glossy, heart-shaped with the lobes curled. Margins entire but often with tooth-like folds or waves. Veins and veinlets are depressed above and protruding below. veins have a prominent white halo below. Secondary veins are numerous, spreading toward the margins at Mo fir then gently curving toward the tip and approaching the margin gradually over a long path nearly parailel to Petioles about 80% of blade length, to 1" (2.5 cm) thick and spongy, not hollow but with numerous tiny air Fill tubes and string-like fibers distributed throughout, broadly U-channeled with paper-thin upper edges, gen rounded below. Flowers emerge in very early spring directly out of the root crown at mud level and consist a curving maroon hood about 3" (8 cm) long covering a bumpy club-like structure. This club matures into egg-shaped cluster of roundish bean-like seeds 7-11 mm long in autumn. HABITAT: Mucky swamps and wetland margins with rich soil, especially with spring water seepage. I especially in high-calcium soils. Native. WARNING: All parts contain calcium oxalate raphides and cannot be eaten before processing FOOD USE: The large, starchy roots can be long-dried (weeks to years) or baked (many hours to several day and then eaten. The youngest leaves can be eaten after similar processing. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: With a few thousand years of selective breeding to increase the size and eliminate the raphid this might become a popular vegetable like taro. 20 