FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE
5 Bluebead lily
Clintonia borealis
Liliaceae
(Lily
family)
QUICK CHECK: Glossy, rubbery, entire leaves with finely hairy margins; new leaves
tightly rolled; blue berries. ID difficulty 2.
Perennial spreading by rhizomes to form colonies. Leaves all basal, or
DESCRIPTION: rosette, 4-10" (10-25 cm) long, elliptic or obovate with the tip short-acuminate rather tough
2-3 per the base narrowed but lacking a petiole. Blades thick and
at blunt with a nipple, dark depressed in the center (less so toward the tip), the surfaces smooth when and hairless. rubbed
maturity, emerging they green, are lighter green, rubbery, erect, and rolled tightly. Young leaves squeak at
together. Upon Veins parallel, scarcely visible, flat to faintly depressed above, flat below. Margins entire, first
with a fringe of long hairs but these are lost with age. Scape 6-20" (15-50 cm) tall, 3-4 mm thick, erect (often
leaning in fruit), the surface usually downy when young, bearing 3-15 flowers in a terminal umbel, occasionally
accompanied by other pedicels lower on the scape. Flowers (late spring to early summer) 0.8-1.3" (2-3.3 cm)
across, open skyward or nodding, on pedicels as long as the flower, the 6 tepals narrowly elliptic to almost
strap-like, tapered toward both ends but not sharp-tipped, recurved, light creamy-yellow; the stamens and
pistil as long as or longer than the petals. Fruit a smooth, waxy-looking, glossy, roundish blue berry about
1 cm, maturing late summer, not edible.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Lily-of-the-valley Convallaria majalis (toxic) has 2 leaves on the stem, which is
D-shaped in cross section with sharp edges.
HABITAT: Moderate shade in conifer or mixed conifer-hardwood forests with moist, usually somewhat acidic
soil. Does especially well under white birch. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather young leaves in early spring, preferably while still curled, and eat raw in salads or on
sandwiches. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: The flavor of this spring green is cucumbery but bitter. The bitterness only seems to be accen-
tuated by boiling. I am not personally fond of these greens, but know some people who are.
RELATED EDIBLE? C. umbellulata is a very simi-
lar species endemic to the Appalachians. It may
be edible in the same way but I have not tried it.
Bluebead lily leaves furled in spring.
268
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE 5 Bluebead lily Clintonia borealis Liliaceae (Lily family) QUICK CHECK: Glossy, rubbery, entire leaves with finely hairy margins; new leaves tightly rolled; blue berries. ID difficulty 2. Perennial spreading by rhizomes to form colonies. Leaves all basal, or DESCRIPTION: rosette, 4-10" (10-25 cm) long, elliptic or obovate with the tip short-acuminate rather tough 2-3 per the base narrowed but lacking a petiole. Blades thick and at blunt with a nipple, dark depressed in the center (less so toward the tip), the surfaces smooth when and hairless. rubbed maturity, emerging they green, are lighter green, rubbery, erect, and rolled tightly. Young leaves squeak at together. Upon Veins parallel, scarcely visible, flat to faintly depressed above, flat below. Margins entire, first with a fringe of long hairs but these are lost with age. Scape 6-20" (15-50 cm) tall, 3-4 mm thick, erect (often leaning in fruit), the surface usually downy when young, bearing 3-15 flowers in a terminal umbel, occasionally accompanied by other pedicels lower on the scape. Flowers (late spring to early summer) 0.8-1.3" (2-3.3 cm) across, open skyward or nodding, on pedicels as long as the flower, the 6 tepals narrowly elliptic to almost strap-like, tapered toward both ends but not sharp-tipped, recurved, light creamy-yellow; the stamens and pistil as long as or longer than the petals. Fruit a smooth, waxy-looking, glossy, roundish blue berry about 1 cm, maturing late summer, not edible. CONFUSING PLANTS: Lily-of-the-valley Convallaria majalis (toxic) has 2 leaves on the stem, which is D-shaped in cross section with sharp edges. HABITAT: Moderate shade in conifer or mixed conifer-hardwood forests with moist, usually somewhat acidic soil. Does especially well under white birch. Native. FOOD USE: Gather young leaves in early spring, preferably while still curled, and eat raw in salads or on sandwiches. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: The flavor of this spring green is cucumbery but bitter. The bitterness only seems to be accen- tuated by boiling. I am not personally fond of these greens, but know some people who are. RELATED EDIBLE? C. umbellulata is a very simi- lar species endemic to the Appalachians. It may be edible in the same way but I have not tried it. Bluebead lily leaves furled in spring. 268 