FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE
7
Mountain sorrel
Oxyria digyna + Polygonaceae 2 (Buckwheat family)
CHECK: Alpine plant with clumps of small, broad leaves with 2. heart-shaped
bases, QUICK on long petioles; flowers tiny, clustered, numerous. ID difficulty
Perennial herb spreading by rhizomes to establish new crowns, the tip, all parts 1-2"
DESCRIPTION: Leaves in a basal rosette, heart-shaped at the base, rounded at veins pal-
hairless. cm) slightly broader than long, succulent and very tender. Major Petioles mostly
mate, depressed times blade length, rising 4-6" (10-15 cm), 1.5-2.5 mm thick, elliptic out section of plane (wider with than the
(2.5-5 across, above and protruding below. Margins wavy but toothless. in cross
erect, about 3 (sometimes reddish near the base), smooth but for a faint channel, have one
deep), Stems mostly green rosette, to 12" (30 cm) tall and 5 mm thick, roundish, hollow, smooth; they may branches.
blade. reduced 1-4 leaves. per There is a broad, clear, membrane-like sheath at the nodes and inflorescence
Inflorescence a or two panicle, its branches raceme-like and densely packed. Flowers tiny, greenish with 4 broad blunt,
cupped tepals and sexual parts in the center. These ripen into 3-sided seeds (achenes) surrounded by
papery wings, light colored but eventually turning red. The mature red panicles are highly visible in summer.
HABITAT: Alpine and arctic tundra, especially on slopes nestled among boulders. Native.
FOOD USE: The leaves can be eaten raw or cooked and are best when young and green. They are tender and
sour at first, becoming tougher, more astringent, and often reddish with age. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This tangy edible is better known from the Rocky Mountains, but like many alpine plants, it is
also widespread in the Far North.
270
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE 7 Mountain sorrel Oxyria digyna + Polygonaceae 2 (Buckwheat family) CHECK: Alpine plant with clumps of small, broad leaves with 2. heart-shaped bases, QUICK on long petioles; flowers tiny, clustered, numerous. ID difficulty Perennial herb spreading by rhizomes to establish new crowns, the tip, all parts 1-2" DESCRIPTION: Leaves in a basal rosette, heart-shaped at the base, rounded at veins pal- hairless. cm) slightly broader than long, succulent and very tender. Major Petioles mostly mate, depressed times blade length, rising 4-6" (10-15 cm), 1.5-2.5 mm thick, elliptic out section of plane (wider with than the (2.5-5 across, above and protruding below. Margins wavy but toothless. in cross erect, about 3 (sometimes reddish near the base), smooth but for a faint channel, have one deep), Stems mostly green rosette, to 12" (30 cm) tall and 5 mm thick, roundish, hollow, smooth; they may branches. blade. reduced 1-4 leaves. per There is a broad, clear, membrane-like sheath at the nodes and inflorescence Inflorescence a or two panicle, its branches raceme-like and densely packed. Flowers tiny, greenish with 4 broad blunt, cupped tepals and sexual parts in the center. These ripen into 3-sided seeds (achenes) surrounded by papery wings, light colored but eventually turning red. The mature red panicles are highly visible in summer. HABITAT: Alpine and arctic tundra, especially on slopes nestled among boulders. Native. FOOD USE: The leaves can be eaten raw or cooked and are best when young and green. They are tender and sour at first, becoming tougher, more astringent, and often reddish with age. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This tangy edible is better known from the Rocky Mountains, but like many alpine plants, it is also widespread in the Far North. 270 