FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE
8 Shooting star
2
2
genus Dodecatheon Primulaceae (Primrose family)
with QUICK 5 spiraled, CHECK: Elliptic, entire basal leaves; leafless stem Homan
reflexed petals, and stamens in a beak-like hearing cluster a ID claster of
DESCRIPTION: 28 cm) long, tapered Perennial. Leaves elliptic or oblanceolate with difficulty 1.
gently keeled below. thick, sparkling in sunlight. Midvein ascending slightly where crowded.
Blades soft, hairless, rather at the base, lying flat where exposed but rounded tips, 4-11" (10
veinlets are also Secondary veins at acute angles, raised above and depressed above.
tered tooth-like raised above. Margins entire but often wavy and depressed below:
broadly channeled. formations. Petioles absent or to 30% of blade length, may light have a few scat
Collective cange
the petiole (Because of the tapered, winged edges, it is impossible in to color, flat to
of the 2 species
rounded, solid starts, or often, if there even is one.) Scapes single, erect, say where
Lsted
still holding in the shoot stage, minutely woolly, up to 24" (6o cm) tall. smooth, LYDS reddish,
it. There is a capsules. whorl Inflorescense a terminal umbel of 5-75, or an umbel with one sometimes or persistent and
unequal in of overlapping triangular bracts beneath the inflorescence. Pedicels are more whorls beneath
back length. Flowers (mid to late spring) drooping, the petals 0.6-0.9" (15-23 mm) long, curving, and
together swept so far as to often touch each other. 5 stamens with yellow anthers point forward long, and spiraling are and
to form a "beak." Fruit a 5-part, oblong, vase-like capsule 0.3-0.7" (8-18 mm) long, pointing skyward pressed
SPECIES: D. meadia, of the Eastern Woodlands, is larger in all respects. Its flowers are always in
and have white or pink petals. D. pulchellum, of the Western Plains is a somewhat smaller plant with an narrower umbel
leaves, fewer flowers per umbel, and purple petals.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Similarly sized saxifrages have hairy leaves and more toothed margins.
HABITAT: Rich wooded slopes and ridgetops, especially in sunny spots; oak and pine savannahs on rich soil,
clearings and meadows. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather greens and shoots in spring; eat them raw or cooked.
They have a slight wintergreen flavor with a faint bitter aftertaste, and
are very tender when young. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: These are excellent greens cooked, not as good raw
The leaves taste better than the scapes. Especially in the East, snooting
stars have declined dramatically due to fire suppression and agricultural
development.
D. meadia flowers.
D. pulchellum flowers.
Young leaves and shoot of D. meadia.
271
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE 8 Shooting star 2 2 genus Dodecatheon Primulaceae (Primrose family) with QUICK 5 spiraled, CHECK: Elliptic, entire basal leaves; leafless stem Homan reflexed petals, and stamens in a beak-like hearing cluster a ID claster of DESCRIPTION: 28 cm) long, tapered Perennial. Leaves elliptic or oblanceolate with difficulty 1. gently keeled below. thick, sparkling in sunlight. Midvein ascending slightly where crowded. Blades soft, hairless, rather at the base, lying flat where exposed but rounded tips, 4-11" (10 veinlets are also Secondary veins at acute angles, raised above and depressed above. tered tooth-like raised above. Margins entire but often wavy and depressed below: broadly channeled. formations. Petioles absent or to 30% of blade length, may light have a few scat Collective cange the petiole (Because of the tapered, winged edges, it is impossible in to color, flat to of the 2 species rounded, solid starts, or often, if there even is one.) Scapes single, erect, say where Lsted still holding in the shoot stage, minutely woolly, up to 24" (6o cm) tall. smooth, LYDS reddish, it. There is a capsules. whorl Inflorescense a terminal umbel of 5-75, or an umbel with one sometimes or persistent and unequal in of overlapping triangular bracts beneath the inflorescence. Pedicels are more whorls beneath back length. Flowers (mid to late spring) drooping, the petals 0.6-0.9" (15-23 mm) long, curving, and together swept so far as to often touch each other. 5 stamens with yellow anthers point forward long, and spiraling are and to form a "beak." Fruit a 5-part, oblong, vase-like capsule 0.3-0.7" (8-18 mm) long, pointing skyward pressed SPECIES: D. meadia, of the Eastern Woodlands, is larger in all respects. Its flowers are always in and have white or pink petals. D. pulchellum, of the Western Plains is a somewhat smaller plant with an narrower umbel leaves, fewer flowers per umbel, and purple petals. CONFUSING PLANTS: Similarly sized saxifrages have hairy leaves and more toothed margins. HABITAT: Rich wooded slopes and ridgetops, especially in sunny spots; oak and pine savannahs on rich soil, clearings and meadows. Native. FOOD USE: Gather greens and shoots in spring; eat them raw or cooked. They have a slight wintergreen flavor with a faint bitter aftertaste, and are very tender when young. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: These are excellent greens cooked, not as good raw The leaves taste better than the scapes. Especially in the East, snooting stars have declined dramatically due to fire suppression and agricultural development. D. meadia flowers. D. pulchellum flowers. Young leaves and shoot of D. meadia. 271 