FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE
1
2
9 Common plantain
Plantago major, P. rugelii
Plantaginaceae (Plantain family)
QUICK CHECK: Broad basal leaves, the main veins parailel; leafless spikes of unshowy
flowers. ID difficulty 1. fibrous root system. Leaves in rosettes crowded, of 5-11, hug- the
DESCRIPTION: where Perennial vegetation with a is absent or short but ascending where often ruffled, to 11"
ging the ground ovate to nearly round, sometimes cupped, irregularly bumpy or wavy,
(28 blades cm) broadly long, tapered elliptic at or the that base could and be blunt-tipped. called very low, Margins broad teeth, but they are never ridged serrated. below, Major broad veins and
often with a few features below. Petioles 40-140 % of blade length, have small,
parallel, depressed above above, and protruding the petiole margins sharp. The blade and petiole are tough, hairless finely or hairy, 8-30"
flat to slightly channeled often curved near the base, round, solid, smooth, 20" (50 cm)
sparse hairs. Scape and erect, mm leafless, thick. Inflorescence (mid to late summer) a densely packed the spike to Fruit ascend-
(20-76 cm) tall unshowy, 2-3 4-part flowers and occupying the upper half or more of breaking scape. in two near or
long, ing capsules bearing 2-3 tiny, mm long, shaped like elongated eggs, turning brown when ripe and
below the middle to release several angled brown or black seeds.
SPECIES: The two listed are nearly identical and foragers need not differentiate them, but the native P. rugelii
has the purple petiole.
HABITAT: Lawns, fields, roadsides, trails-almost any sunny or partly sunny ground with soil disturbed within
the last 20 years or so. Native and introduced.
FOOD USE: The youngest, light green leaves can be eaten raw or cooked. The best use I've tried is baked
like kale chips. Immature spikes with small flower buds (throughout summer) can be eaten raw or cooked-I
like them roasted in a campfire for 30 seconds. Ripe, brown pods (late summer through fall) can be stripped
from the spikes easily by hand; after separating the seeds from their capsules they can be cooked in porridge.
Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Because it grows in almost everyone's
lawn, plantain is usually one of the first plants that a
forager,learns. While edible, it usually disappoints. The
leaves are stringy and have an odd, mediocre flavor.
The roasted immature spikes taste better but are
insubstantial, and mostly roughage. The seeds seem
promising, but are very hard to separate from the chaff.
272
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES ENTIRE 1 2 9 Common plantain Plantago major, P. rugelii Plantaginaceae (Plantain family) QUICK CHECK: Broad basal leaves, the main veins parailel; leafless spikes of unshowy flowers. ID difficulty 1. fibrous root system. Leaves in rosettes crowded, of 5-11, hug- the DESCRIPTION: where Perennial vegetation with a is absent or short but ascending where often ruffled, to 11" ging the ground ovate to nearly round, sometimes cupped, irregularly bumpy or wavy, (28 blades cm) broadly long, tapered elliptic at or the that base could and be blunt-tipped. called very low, Margins broad teeth, but they are never ridged serrated. below, Major broad veins and often with a few features below. Petioles 40-140 % of blade length, have small, parallel, depressed above above, and protruding the petiole margins sharp. The blade and petiole are tough, hairless finely or hairy, 8-30" flat to slightly channeled often curved near the base, round, solid, smooth, 20" (50 cm) sparse hairs. Scape and erect, mm leafless, thick. Inflorescence (mid to late summer) a densely packed the spike to Fruit ascend- (20-76 cm) tall unshowy, 2-3 4-part flowers and occupying the upper half or more of breaking scape. in two near or long, ing capsules bearing 2-3 tiny, mm long, shaped like elongated eggs, turning brown when ripe and below the middle to release several angled brown or black seeds. SPECIES: The two listed are nearly identical and foragers need not differentiate them, but the native P. rugelii has the purple petiole. HABITAT: Lawns, fields, roadsides, trails-almost any sunny or partly sunny ground with soil disturbed within the last 20 years or so. Native and introduced. FOOD USE: The youngest, light green leaves can be eaten raw or cooked. The best use I've tried is baked like kale chips. Immature spikes with small flower buds (throughout summer) can be eaten raw or cooked-I like them roasted in a campfire for 30 seconds. Ripe, brown pods (late summer through fall) can be stripped from the spikes easily by hand; after separating the seeds from their capsules they can be cooked in porridge. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Because it grows in almost everyone's lawn, plantain is usually one of the first plants that a forager,learns. While edible, it usually disappoints. The leaves are stringy and have an odd, mediocre flavor. The roasted immature spikes taste better but are insubstantial, and mostly roughage. The seeds seem promising, but are very hard to separate from the chaff. 272 