TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 19
The key is not your final answer!
Single, five-petaled, asymmetric flowers at the end of a long, hooked, very thin scape with an offset
1. Blue violet
pair of tiny bracts. (Stemless violets.)
Blade Blade elongated, the base somewhat arrowhead-lobed, with large teeth.
heart-shaped, teeth curled toward leaf tip like a cresting wave.
2. Arrowhead violet
3. Birdfoot violet
or
Blade very deeply palmately lobed, the lobes narrow.
Not as above. (Everything but stemless violets.)
Leaves distinctly longer than wide; veins pinnate (if evident).
Sap milky.
Scape with a single head, never branched.
4. Dandelion
Scape smooth, multiple per rosette.
Scape with fine ridges; one per rosette.
5. Potato dandelion
or
Lobes few to none.
6. Tuberous false dandelion
or
Lobes several on each leaf.
Scapes branched, with multiple heads.
7. Hairy cat's ear
or
Leaves with dense erect hairs on both sides.
8. Fall dandelion
Leaves sparsely hairy or hairless.
Sap not milky.
9. Gumbo-lily
Flowers directly from the base (no stalk).
10. English daisy
Stalk solid, less than 8" (20 cm) tall with a single head.
Stalk hollow, more than 10" (25 cm) tall, with a panicle of numerous small flowers.
Leaves thick with blunt wavy teeth and no clear petiole.
11. Swamp saxifrage
Leaves thin with sharp teeth and a distinct winged petiole.
12. Brook saxifrage
Leaves about as broad as long; veins palmate.
Blades densely woolly-whitish below and often more than 6" (15 cm) long.
Leaves shallowly lobed or double-toothed.
13. Coltsfoot
or
Leaves deeply palmately lobed.
14. Northern coltsfoot
Leaves not densely wooly-whitish beneath.
Petiole attached to the underside (not the edge) of the blade.
15. Beach pennywort
Petiole attached to blade edge at a cut-out base.
16. Coinleaf
STEMLESS VIOLETS
2
2
IWE-372
genus Voila (in part) family Violaceae
Stemless violets are a group of many species with highly variable leaf shape, For the sake of brevity I list three
species that are widespread, common, and taste good. However, all violets of the genus Viola are edible, and
with several good species are not listed. Violets, as a group, are very easy to identify when flowering, but harder
you can them any time.
only collect the leaves present. Familiarize yourself deeply with violet leaves while they are flowering, and then
Leaves COLLECTIVE arranged DESCRIPTION: in To avoid repetition, note that all the stemless violets share these
Peduncles individual rosettes from the or clumps of rosettes, with stipules packed at the base. Petioles characteristics:
tough), erect, hooked base but several to many per plant; they are long, thin, long and thin.
at the top, with an offset pair of tiny bracts partway up the stalk. Flowers green, solid, have fleshy 5 separate (not
274
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 19 The key is not your final answer! Single, five-petaled, asymmetric flowers at the end of a long, hooked, very thin scape with an offset 1. Blue violet pair of tiny bracts. (Stemless violets.) Blade Blade elongated, the base somewhat arrowhead-lobed, with large teeth. heart-shaped, teeth curled toward leaf tip like a cresting wave. 2. Arrowhead violet 3. Birdfoot violet or Blade very deeply palmately lobed, the lobes narrow. Not as above. (Everything but stemless violets.) Leaves distinctly longer than wide; veins pinnate (if evident). Sap milky. Scape with a single head, never branched. 4. Dandelion Scape smooth, multiple per rosette. Scape with fine ridges; one per rosette. 5. Potato dandelion or Lobes few to none. 6. Tuberous false dandelion or Lobes several on each leaf. Scapes branched, with multiple heads. 7. Hairy cat's ear or Leaves with dense erect hairs on both sides. 8. Fall dandelion Leaves sparsely hairy or hairless. Sap not milky. 9. Gumbo-lily Flowers directly from the base (no stalk). 10. English daisy Stalk solid, less than 8" (20 cm) tall with a single head. Stalk hollow, more than 10" (25 cm) tall, with a panicle of numerous small flowers. Leaves thick with blunt wavy teeth and no clear petiole. 11. Swamp saxifrage Leaves thin with sharp teeth and a distinct winged petiole. 12. Brook saxifrage Leaves about as broad as long; veins palmate. Blades densely woolly-whitish below and often more than 6" (15 cm) long. Leaves shallowly lobed or double-toothed. 13. Coltsfoot or Leaves deeply palmately lobed. 14. Northern coltsfoot Leaves not densely wooly-whitish beneath. Petiole attached to the underside (not the edge) of the blade. 15. Beach pennywort Petiole attached to blade edge at a cut-out base. 16. Coinleaf STEMLESS VIOLETS 2 2 IWE-372 genus Voila (in part) family Violaceae Stemless violets are a group of many species with highly variable leaf shape, For the sake of brevity I list three species that are widespread, common, and taste good. However, all violets of the genus Viola are edible, and with several good species are not listed. Violets, as a group, are very easy to identify when flowering, but harder you can them any time. only collect the leaves present. Familiarize yourself deeply with violet leaves while they are flowering, and then Leaves COLLECTIVE arranged DESCRIPTION: in To avoid repetition, note that all the stemless violets share these Peduncles individual rosettes from the or clumps of rosettes, with stipules packed at the base. Petioles characteristics: tough), erect, hooked base but several to many per plant; they are long, thin, long and thin. at the top, with an offset pair of tiny bracts partway up the stalk. Flowers green, solid, have fleshy 5 separate (not 274 