0
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED
sepals and close a corolla of 5 separate, unequal petals, not radially
person: rounded a spur for pair the for head. the Fruit legs, a an small opposing capsule. pair for the arms, symmetric and a single al. arranged large petal like with 15 an entarged
F
Common
blue
violet
Viola
sororia
2
832
blue QUICK flower CHECK: Long-stalked, curled, heart-shaped clustered leaves; irregular Trantalad
borne singly at the end of a long, thin, nodding stem. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial herb growing from a stout horizontal rhizome. Leaves
(5-15 cm) long, held at a sharp angle to the petiole, heart to kidney-shaped, often 2-6"
than long, the blunt basal lobes often curled upward, the tips blunt-pointed to rounded. wider
Surface occasionally hairless but more often finely hairy on both sides. Midvein flat above,
becoming raised distally. There are 4-6 major secondary veins from the base (usually only
2 arising farther along the midvein). Secondary and smaller veins are slightly depressed,
or raised in a valley. Margins have blunt teeth, each slightly raised, with nipple-tips turned toward the lent
like a cresting wave. Petiole 4-20" (10-50 cm) long, ascending when growing in the open but much taller and tip
erect in competition, solid, D-shaped with a wing-channel that often widens toward the blade, the margin
hairy; the other surfaces hairless or densely coated in fine hairs, especially when young. Stipules inear, share
tipped, often twisted, whitish, the edges membranous with soft bristles. Peduncle about as tail or taller than
the leaves. Flowers 0.4-0.8" (10-20 mm) long, purple (rarely white) with a greenish-white throat and darker
veins. Sepais are triangular, 4-7 mm long. Side petals are hairy at the base. Stamens are hidden. There are
also hidden, self-fertilizing, unshowy flowers produced in summer on stems that stay at ground level. Fruit an avoid
capsule 10-12 mm long, dark green, containing dark brown seeds 2 mm long.
HABITAT: Moderate soil moisture, moderate to high fertility, in full sun to fairly heavy shade, especially where
frequently but not severely disturbed. Lightly used pastures, forest edges, lawns, weedy areas, hayfields,
ditches, floodplain forests, swamp margins. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender greens are most abundant in spring and early summer, but a few good ones can be found
most of the growing season. They can be eaten raw, but I much prefer them cooked. Flowers and peduncies.
available at the same time, are also edible. The flowers are sometimes candied. Conservation 1/1.
COMMENTS: This is one of the most common and widely available edible greens in our area. Nutritional
tests have shown blue violet greens to be extremely high in vitamins C and A. There has long been taxonomic
uncertainty with blue violets, with botanists recognizing one to several similar species. Regardless, If they fit
this general description, they are worth eating.
275
0 FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED sepals and close a corolla of 5 separate, unequal petals, not radially person: rounded a spur for pair the for head. the Fruit legs, a an small opposing capsule. pair for the arms, symmetric and a single al. arranged large petal like with 15 an entarged F Common blue violet Viola sororia 2 832 blue QUICK flower CHECK: Long-stalked, curled, heart-shaped clustered leaves; irregular Trantalad borne singly at the end of a long, thin, nodding stem. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial herb growing from a stout horizontal rhizome. Leaves (5-15 cm) long, held at a sharp angle to the petiole, heart to kidney-shaped, often 2-6" than long, the blunt basal lobes often curled upward, the tips blunt-pointed to rounded. wider Surface occasionally hairless but more often finely hairy on both sides. Midvein flat above, becoming raised distally. There are 4-6 major secondary veins from the base (usually only 2 arising farther along the midvein). Secondary and smaller veins are slightly depressed, or raised in a valley. Margins have blunt teeth, each slightly raised, with nipple-tips turned toward the lent like a cresting wave. Petiole 4-20" (10-50 cm) long, ascending when growing in the open but much taller and tip erect in competition, solid, D-shaped with a wing-channel that often widens toward the blade, the margin hairy; the other surfaces hairless or densely coated in fine hairs, especially when young. Stipules inear, share tipped, often twisted, whitish, the edges membranous with soft bristles. Peduncle about as tail or taller than the leaves. Flowers 0.4-0.8" (10-20 mm) long, purple (rarely white) with a greenish-white throat and darker veins. Sepais are triangular, 4-7 mm long. Side petals are hairy at the base. Stamens are hidden. There are also hidden, self-fertilizing, unshowy flowers produced in summer on stems that stay at ground level. Fruit an avoid capsule 10-12 mm long, dark green, containing dark brown seeds 2 mm long. HABITAT: Moderate soil moisture, moderate to high fertility, in full sun to fairly heavy shade, especially where frequently but not severely disturbed. Lightly used pastures, forest edges, lawns, weedy areas, hayfields, ditches, floodplain forests, swamp margins. Native. FOOD USE: Tender greens are most abundant in spring and early summer, but a few good ones can be found most of the growing season. They can be eaten raw, but I much prefer them cooked. Flowers and peduncies. available at the same time, are also edible. The flowers are sometimes candied. Conservation 1/1. COMMENTS: This is one of the most common and widely available edible greens in our area. Nutritional tests have shown blue violet greens to be extremely high in vitamins C and A. There has long been taxonomic uncertainty with blue violets, with botanists recognizing one to several similar species. Regardless, If they fit this general description, they are worth eating. 275 