FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED
3
Birdfoot violet
2
2
Viola pedata
family Violaceae
DUICK CHECK: Low plant with clusters of leaves that have long, thin lobes; large, Plat.
(aced violet flowers rise above the leaves. ID difficulty 3.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a short horizontal rhizome, forming small clumps or
colonies. Leaves numerous, clustered, overlapping, deeply palmately lobed (almost
fully divided), the lobes usually narrowly oblanceolate, blunt-tipped (never clawed),
often cupped slightly upward, mostly entire but occasionally with a large tooth or two.
Surfaces shiny and hairless. Major veins (down the center of each lobe) slightly raised above and flat below:
smaller veins not evident. Petiole thin, erect, 2-5" (5-13 cm) tall, broadly V-channeled with 0 raised line down
the center. Stipules long-pointed, often hidden near the ground, with cilia on the margins. Peduncles grooved,
rising above the leaves. Flowers (late spring) to 1" (2.5 cm) across, the sepals long and tapered, the petals
blue-violet, none of them hairy at the base, the largest one white at the base with darker blue veins. The
corolla appears like it has been flattened.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Various species of larkspurs (Delphinium) and monkshood (Aconitum) (both dan
gerously toxic) have leaves of a similar shape which taste bitter or acrid. These species have most of their
leaves on the stem, and the lobes of basal leaves are broader with more teeth than those of birdfoot violet.
Basal leaves of our most common larkspurs (D. tricorne and D. carolinianum) have pointed lobes, depressed
veins, and hairy petioles and margins. Monkshood leaves are hairless or nearly 50, but the lobes and teeth.
if not pointed, are nipple or claw-like. If you are not deeply familiar with birdfoot violet leaves, eat them only
when the flowers are present to confirm identification.
HABITAT: Dry, usually sandy soil in full sun: prairies, pine or oak barrens, rock outcrops. Native.
N
FOOD USE: The young leaves, flowers, and flower stalks are all good raw or cooked. The leaves are muci-
laginous and remain rather tender at maturity even late into the growing season. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: This is reported to be the only North American violet species that lacks hidden self-pollinated
flowers. It is perhaps the most impressive of all our species in bloom, and is also an excellent edible.
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED 3 Birdfoot violet 2 2 Viola pedata family Violaceae DUICK CHECK: Low plant with clusters of leaves that have long, thin lobes; large, Plat. (aced violet flowers rise above the leaves. ID difficulty 3. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a short horizontal rhizome, forming small clumps or colonies. Leaves numerous, clustered, overlapping, deeply palmately lobed (almost fully divided), the lobes usually narrowly oblanceolate, blunt-tipped (never clawed), often cupped slightly upward, mostly entire but occasionally with a large tooth or two. Surfaces shiny and hairless. Major veins (down the center of each lobe) slightly raised above and flat below: smaller veins not evident. Petiole thin, erect, 2-5" (5-13 cm) tall, broadly V-channeled with 0 raised line down the center. Stipules long-pointed, often hidden near the ground, with cilia on the margins. Peduncles grooved, rising above the leaves. Flowers (late spring) to 1" (2.5 cm) across, the sepals long and tapered, the petals blue-violet, none of them hairy at the base, the largest one white at the base with darker blue veins. The corolla appears like it has been flattened. CONFUSING PLANTS: Various species of larkspurs (Delphinium) and monkshood (Aconitum) (both dan gerously toxic) have leaves of a similar shape which taste bitter or acrid. These species have most of their leaves on the stem, and the lobes of basal leaves are broader with more teeth than those of birdfoot violet. Basal leaves of our most common larkspurs (D. tricorne and D. carolinianum) have pointed lobes, depressed veins, and hairy petioles and margins. Monkshood leaves are hairless or nearly 50, but the lobes and teeth. if not pointed, are nipple or claw-like. If you are not deeply familiar with birdfoot violet leaves, eat them only when the flowers are present to confirm identification. HABITAT: Dry, usually sandy soil in full sun: prairies, pine or oak barrens, rock outcrops. Native. N FOOD USE: The young leaves, flowers, and flower stalks are all good raw or cooked. The leaves are muci- laginous and remain rather tender at maturity even late into the growing season. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: This is reported to be the only North American violet species that lacks hidden self-pollinated flowers. It is perhaps the most impressive of all our species in bloom, and is also an excellent edible. 