NA
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED
,
Arrowhead violet
2
2
Viola sagittata A family Violaceae
QUICK MER K: Short violet with elongated leaves, the bases lobed or flared outward,
with enlarged teeth. flowers blue. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from short rhizomes. Leaves 1,2-4" (3-10 cm) long, (but rarely
that large during early bloom when they are best) lanceolate to long-triangular or nar-
rowly heart-shaped. the tip blunt. The base is broad, lobed backward (arrowhead-like)
and often flared outward as well; the lobes are curled up, often enough to meet. Surfaces
may be glossy and hairless to densely hairy. Midvein raised above, protruding below.
Secondary veins 4-6 per side, narrowly angled, raised above. Margins have low, blunt, forward-pointing teeth
or waves. except on the basal lobes, which have enlarged, sharper teeth. Stipules are lanceolate. Petiole erect,
60-110% of blade length, with a broad, deep wing-channel. Peduncle 3-6" (8-15 cm) tall, somewhat flattened
and grooved. rising about to the level of the leaves. Flowers 0.7-0.9" (18-23 mm) long, the petals crammed
together (spreading less than most violets), purple (the bases white with purple veins). Side petals are hairy
at the base. The nectary spur is prominent, pale, and laterally flattened.
HABITAT: Oak-hickory-pine forests, forest edges, roadsides, clearings-moist to dry. Native.
FOOD USE: Young leaves, peduncles, and flowers are all good, but they are on the small side for collecting in
quantity. Conser-
vation 2/1.
COMMENTS:
This is one of the
better-tasting
violets. Botanists
split this into two
forms: a hairless
one mainly in the
South, and a hairy
one mainly in the
North. My experi-
ence and the pho-
109 here pertain to
the southern form.
Other botanists
separate these into
two species
NA FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED , Arrowhead violet 2 2 Viola sagittata A family Violaceae QUICK MER K: Short violet with elongated leaves, the bases lobed or flared outward, with enlarged teeth. flowers blue. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from short rhizomes. Leaves 1,2-4" (3-10 cm) long, (but rarely that large during early bloom when they are best) lanceolate to long-triangular or nar- rowly heart-shaped. the tip blunt. The base is broad, lobed backward (arrowhead-like) and often flared outward as well; the lobes are curled up, often enough to meet. Surfaces may be glossy and hairless to densely hairy. Midvein raised above, protruding below. Secondary veins 4-6 per side, narrowly angled, raised above. Margins have low, blunt, forward-pointing teeth or waves. except on the basal lobes, which have enlarged, sharper teeth. Stipules are lanceolate. Petiole erect, 60-110% of blade length, with a broad, deep wing-channel. Peduncle 3-6" (8-15 cm) tall, somewhat flattened and grooved. rising about to the level of the leaves. Flowers 0.7-0.9" (18-23 mm) long, the petals crammed together (spreading less than most violets), purple (the bases white with purple veins). Side petals are hairy at the base. The nectary spur is prominent, pale, and laterally flattened. HABITAT: Oak-hickory-pine forests, forest edges, roadsides, clearings-moist to dry. Native. FOOD USE: Young leaves, peduncles, and flowers are all good, but they are on the small side for collecting in quantity. Conser- vation 2/1. COMMENTS: This is one of the better-tasting violets. Botanists split this into two forms: a hairless one mainly in the South, and a hairy one mainly in the North. My experi- ence and the pho- 109 here pertain to the southern form. Other botanists separate these into two species 