FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED
1
2
NG-453
4 Dandelion
Taraxacum officinale 1 3 Asteraceae (Composite family)
CHECK leaves with large teeth of lobes pointing toward the base; 2. multiple
bollow QUICK 51 apes, P21 with a single broad, vellow flowerhead. ID difficulty
Perennial from an enlarged taproot. often forked at the top into multiple
DESCRIPTION: without rhizomes. All parts with milky sap. Leaves in a dense basal rosette, ruffled, 3-20"
(8-50 crowns long wider toward the tips, which are blunt or broadly pointed. The blade is almost
with sparse scurfy hairs above. Midvein low and
flat above, rounded beneath, often woolly but never with
erect hairs. Secondary veins 70-80° to the midvein, faint, nearly flat above
and protruding below. Margins often entire near the tip, but otherwise usually
have large teeth or lobes, sometimes with very long, needle-like tips; lobes
tend to point back toward the center of the rosette. Leaf shape is highly vari-
able. It's hard to say where the leaf ends and the petiole begins-if there is a
petiole it has a toothed wing. Scapes may be single but are usually clumped,
2-25 per rosette, hollow and thin-walled, unbranched, 4-32" (10-80 cm) tall
and 4-11 mm wide, light tawny or green to reddish, often woolly (especially
when young). Flowers composite, each head borne singly at the scape's apex,
1.5-2" (3.8-5 cm) across, composed of bright yellow 5-toothed ray florets,
the head subtended by numerous long bracts. Seeds (achenes) elongated
with a thin beak terminating in a parachute (pappus), these forming a fluffy,
whitish-gray spherical head.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Many plants have similar leaf shape and milky sap,
but they either have leaves on the stems, branched stems, or both, In the
rosette stage most of these species can be told from dandelion by having
either keeled midveins below, erect hairs, or both. Luckily, most confusing
species are related edibles.
HABITAT: From moist to dry soil on disturbed ground; thrives in full sun and
partial shade. Fields, lawns, trails, yards, etc. Probably native.
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED 1 2 NG-453 4 Dandelion Taraxacum officinale 1 3 Asteraceae (Composite family) CHECK leaves with large teeth of lobes pointing toward the base; 2. multiple bollow QUICK 51 apes, P21 with a single broad, vellow flowerhead. ID difficulty Perennial from an enlarged taproot. often forked at the top into multiple DESCRIPTION: without rhizomes. All parts with milky sap. Leaves in a dense basal rosette, ruffled, 3-20" (8-50 crowns long wider toward the tips, which are blunt or broadly pointed. The blade is almost with sparse scurfy hairs above. Midvein low and flat above, rounded beneath, often woolly but never with erect hairs. Secondary veins 70-80° to the midvein, faint, nearly flat above and protruding below. Margins often entire near the tip, but otherwise usually have large teeth or lobes, sometimes with very long, needle-like tips; lobes tend to point back toward the center of the rosette. Leaf shape is highly vari- able. It's hard to say where the leaf ends and the petiole begins-if there is a petiole it has a toothed wing. Scapes may be single but are usually clumped, 2-25 per rosette, hollow and thin-walled, unbranched, 4-32" (10-80 cm) tall and 4-11 mm wide, light tawny or green to reddish, often woolly (especially when young). Flowers composite, each head borne singly at the scape's apex, 1.5-2" (3.8-5 cm) across, composed of bright yellow 5-toothed ray florets, the head subtended by numerous long bracts. Seeds (achenes) elongated with a thin beak terminating in a parachute (pappus), these forming a fluffy, whitish-gray spherical head. CONFUSING PLANTS: Many plants have similar leaf shape and milky sap, but they either have leaves on the stems, branched stems, or both, In the rosette stage most of these species can be told from dandelion by having either keeled midveins below, erect hairs, or both. Luckily, most confusing species are related edibles. HABITAT: From moist to dry soil on disturbed ground; thrives in full sun and partial shade. Fields, lawns, trails, yards, etc. Probably native. 