FOOD USE: Roots of young plants have a nice texture and flavor but are somewhat bitter; they are best boiled
and drained. Roots of any age can be dried, roasted until brown and brittle, then used to brew a coffee-like
beverage. The heart is the young center leaves and embryonic flower parts clustered above the root crown
in early spring. 1 gouge them out of the ground with a stiff teaspoon and steam or fry them. Leaves are best in
spring before flowers open, but edible all year. Flower stalks are quite bitter but for some reason I love them
Flowers can be nibbled raw, used as a garnish, cooked, or brewed in tea either fresh or dried. They are also
the flavoring for the famed dandelion wine. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Among our best-known weeds and most popular wild edibles, dandelion greens are excellent
when gathered and used according to tradition. Try the spring leaves, before flowering, fried with bacon and
onions. Despite it being "common knowledge" that dandelions were introduced from Europe, I have seen no
good evidence or sound argument that Taraxacum officinale is not also native to North America.
LS
Potato dandelion
2
2
2
Krigia dandelion
Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK CHECK: Dandelion-like herb with a single
scape; leaves entire or nearly so. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Colony-forming perennial herb
spreading by rhizomes and forming tubers, pea to
grape-sized, roughly rounded and often knobby.
Sap milky. Leaves all basal (there is occasionally a
pair just above the base), 2-8 per crown, narrow, oblanceolate to in-
ear, 2-8" (5-20 cm) long
and generally less than 1"
(2.5 cm) wide, thin and
delicate: a careful look
reveals scattered min-
Lite hairs. Midvein ight
in color. wide at the base,
slightly depressed above:
secondary veins few and
faintly depressed. Mar-
gins finely and sparselv
hairy. entire or with a few
very widely spaced teeth
or lobes. The lobes are
blunt with a tiny nipple
(Continued on the next
page.)
179
FOOD USE: Roots of young plants have a nice texture and flavor but are somewhat bitter; they are best boiled and drained. Roots of any age can be dried, roasted until brown and brittle, then used to brew a coffee-like beverage. The heart is the young center leaves and embryonic flower parts clustered above the root crown in early spring. 1 gouge them out of the ground with a stiff teaspoon and steam or fry them. Leaves are best in spring before flowers open, but edible all year. Flower stalks are quite bitter but for some reason I love them Flowers can be nibbled raw, used as a garnish, cooked, or brewed in tea either fresh or dried. They are also the flavoring for the famed dandelion wine. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Among our best-known weeds and most popular wild edibles, dandelion greens are excellent when gathered and used according to tradition. Try the spring leaves, before flowering, fried with bacon and onions. Despite it being "common knowledge" that dandelions were introduced from Europe, I have seen no good evidence or sound argument that Taraxacum officinale is not also native to North America. LS Potato dandelion 2 2 2 Krigia dandelion Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK CHECK: Dandelion-like herb with a single scape; leaves entire or nearly so. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Colony-forming perennial herb spreading by rhizomes and forming tubers, pea to grape-sized, roughly rounded and often knobby. Sap milky. Leaves all basal (there is occasionally a pair just above the base), 2-8 per crown, narrow, oblanceolate to in- ear, 2-8" (5-20 cm) long and generally less than 1" (2.5 cm) wide, thin and delicate: a careful look reveals scattered min- Lite hairs. Midvein ight in color. wide at the base, slightly depressed above: secondary veins few and faintly depressed. Mar- gins finely and sparselv hairy. entire or with a few very widely spaced teeth or lobes. The lobes are blunt with a tiny nipple (Continued on the next page.) 179 