FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED
7
Hairy cat's ear
2
2
Hypochaeris radicata Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK CHECK: Very hairy dandelion-like rosette leaves; yellow composite Howerhead:
on a branched stalk. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Weedy perennial, the rosette often tightly hugging the ground
Leaves basal, without petioles, 3-7" (8-18 cm) long and 0.9-1,6" (23-40 cm) across, with
numerous blunt lobes at a right angle to the midvein, the sinuses shallow. Curving, erect
hairs grow from raised bumps evenly distributed over both sides. Midvein slightly convex
above, hairy, often with dark bumps, and rounded below. There are no evident secondary
veins above. Stalks 8-20" (20-50 cm) tall, 2-4 mm thick, solid, faintly ridged, hairless except
Occasional
outside
sometimes near the base, sparsely branched (often near the base), spreading or leaning to
mapped area.
erect. There are a few tiny reduced leaves
less than 1 cm scattered on the stalk. Inflorescence composite
heads at branch tips, yellow, about 1" (2.5 cm) across (resem-
bling small dandelions), with ray florets only, the tips 5-toothed
Outer rays are gray-green in the center and stalked at the base
(they must be pulled out to see this). Seeds (achenes) narrow,
beaked, parachuted, in a round gray head like that of dandelion
but smaller and with a ragged appearance.
HABITAT: Primarily lawns, but also in other sunny, disturbed
sites. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Collect the tenderest, lushest, and cleanest leaves
you can find, from robust, healthy plants; best in late spring
and early summer. Edible raw in salads but better as a cooked
green. Flower stalk shoots, picked when short and before they
branch, are good boiled or steamed.
COMMENTS: This plant is a less-touted relative of the com-
mon dandelion that is almost as good. While common locally
in the eastern US., it is not nearly so prevalent here as it is in
the Pacific Northwest, where it is often a dominant law weed.
281
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED 7 Hairy cat's ear 2 2 Hypochaeris radicata Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK CHECK: Very hairy dandelion-like rosette leaves; yellow composite Howerhead: on a branched stalk. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Weedy perennial, the rosette often tightly hugging the ground Leaves basal, without petioles, 3-7" (8-18 cm) long and 0.9-1,6" (23-40 cm) across, with numerous blunt lobes at a right angle to the midvein, the sinuses shallow. Curving, erect hairs grow from raised bumps evenly distributed over both sides. Midvein slightly convex above, hairy, often with dark bumps, and rounded below. There are no evident secondary veins above. Stalks 8-20" (20-50 cm) tall, 2-4 mm thick, solid, faintly ridged, hairless except Occasional outside sometimes near the base, sparsely branched (often near the base), spreading or leaning to mapped area. erect. There are a few tiny reduced leaves less than 1 cm scattered on the stalk. Inflorescence composite heads at branch tips, yellow, about 1" (2.5 cm) across (resem- bling small dandelions), with ray florets only, the tips 5-toothed Outer rays are gray-green in the center and stalked at the base (they must be pulled out to see this). Seeds (achenes) narrow, beaked, parachuted, in a round gray head like that of dandelion but smaller and with a ragged appearance. HABITAT: Primarily lawns, but also in other sunny, disturbed sites. Introduced. FOOD USE: Collect the tenderest, lushest, and cleanest leaves you can find, from robust, healthy plants; best in late spring and early summer. Edible raw in salads but better as a cooked green. Flower stalk shoots, picked when short and before they branch, are good boiled or steamed. COMMENTS: This plant is a less-touted relative of the com- mon dandelion that is almost as good. While common locally in the eastern US., it is not nearly so prevalent here as it is in the Pacific Northwest, where it is often a dominant law weed. 281 