FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED
5 Potato dandelion (continued)
solitary 5-22 (13-56 cm) tall and 2-4 mm wide, proportion- hollow
Scape much thinner than that of dandelion, with a very small under
ately in the center, finely ridged. glaucous. hairless except right
the flowerhead. Inflorescence (spring to early summer) a single,
yellow, terminal head 1-1.5" (25-38 mm) across, with ray florets
only. the outer rays much larger than the inner. The sides of rays
are parallel and the tip truncated with 5 deeply cut teeth. Under the
stress of shade or mowing the plants are stunted and may rarely
flower. Seed columnar, reddish brown, with an attached parachute.
CONFUSING SPECIES: A close relative, Krigia virginica, is safe
but very bitter.
HABITAT: Roadsides, old fields, forest borders, prairies, savan-
nahs and open woods with medium-moisture, medium to rich soil, sandy or clay-loam. Native.
FOOD USE: Dig the small tubers at any time and use as a cooked vegetable; they are good but mildly bitter.
The greens can be used raw or cooked whenever present, but are best in early spring; the small size hampers
gathering in quantity. Flowers and scapes are edible too but tiny. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: I bet you never knew there was such a plant. It surprised me, too.
6 Tuberous false dandelion
NW
1
1
1
Pyrrhopappus grandiflorus
Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK CHECK: Small rosette of blunt-lobed, dandelion-like leaves with a single stalk
bearing a single large yellow flower. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial spring ephemeral from a spherical to elliptic tuber to 1" (2.5 cm)
long, with brown skin and white flesh, the roots attached mostly at the top and bottom but
not the sides. Above this tuber is a vertical white stem to 3" (8 cm) terminating in a rosette
at ground level. Basal leaves 3-6" (8-15 cm) long, pinnately lobed, the lobes triangular and
hairier, blunt, wider distally, with sparsely toothed and often reddish margins. The top is sparsely hairy, the
Scapes especially on veins. Midvein scarcely depressed to flat above; secondary veins almost bottom
1.6-2.4" 4-14" (4-6 (10-36 cm) cm) tall and 3-5 mm thick with a small hollow, hairy, with fine ridges. Head are obscure.
of the column dark. across, Seeds with elongated ray florets with only, a thread-like these bright attachment yellow, truncated with a 5-lobed tip, (spring) the lower single, part
ending in a broad parachute, forming a rounded head.
or disturbed. Native.
HABITAT: Dry, sunny, well-drained prairies, especially where sandy
tops FOOD USE: Tubers can be eaten cooked-they are best when
cooked; are dormant. Young leaves and scapes can be eaten raw the or
they are rather bitter. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: its little This beautiful sunburst seems too big
flowers were rosette. To get the tubers you need to remember a flower where the for
in spring.
280
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED 5 Potato dandelion (continued) solitary 5-22 (13-56 cm) tall and 2-4 mm wide, proportion- hollow Scape much thinner than that of dandelion, with a very small under ately in the center, finely ridged. glaucous. hairless except right the flowerhead. Inflorescence (spring to early summer) a single, yellow, terminal head 1-1.5" (25-38 mm) across, with ray florets only. the outer rays much larger than the inner. The sides of rays are parallel and the tip truncated with 5 deeply cut teeth. Under the stress of shade or mowing the plants are stunted and may rarely flower. Seed columnar, reddish brown, with an attached parachute. CONFUSING SPECIES: A close relative, Krigia virginica, is safe but very bitter. HABITAT: Roadsides, old fields, forest borders, prairies, savan- nahs and open woods with medium-moisture, medium to rich soil, sandy or clay-loam. Native. FOOD USE: Dig the small tubers at any time and use as a cooked vegetable; they are good but mildly bitter. The greens can be used raw or cooked whenever present, but are best in early spring; the small size hampers gathering in quantity. Flowers and scapes are edible too but tiny. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: I bet you never knew there was such a plant. It surprised me, too. 6 Tuberous false dandelion NW 1 1 1 Pyrrhopappus grandiflorus Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK CHECK: Small rosette of blunt-lobed, dandelion-like leaves with a single stalk bearing a single large yellow flower. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial spring ephemeral from a spherical to elliptic tuber to 1" (2.5 cm) long, with brown skin and white flesh, the roots attached mostly at the top and bottom but not the sides. Above this tuber is a vertical white stem to 3" (8 cm) terminating in a rosette at ground level. Basal leaves 3-6" (8-15 cm) long, pinnately lobed, the lobes triangular and hairier, blunt, wider distally, with sparsely toothed and often reddish margins. The top is sparsely hairy, the Scapes especially on veins. Midvein scarcely depressed to flat above; secondary veins almost bottom 1.6-2.4" 4-14" (4-6 (10-36 cm) cm) tall and 3-5 mm thick with a small hollow, hairy, with fine ridges. Head are obscure. of the column dark. across, Seeds with elongated ray florets with only, a thread-like these bright attachment yellow, truncated with a 5-lobed tip, (spring) the lower single, part ending in a broad parachute, forming a rounded head. or disturbed. Native. HABITAT: Dry, sunny, well-drained prairies, especially where sandy tops FOOD USE: Tubers can be eaten cooked-they are best when cooked; are dormant. Young leaves and scapes can be eaten raw the or they are rather bitter. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: its little This beautiful sunburst seems too big flowers were rosette. To get the tubers you need to remember a flower where the for in spring. 280 