FLOWERING
STEM.LEAFLESS,
8 Fall dandelion
Leontodon autumnalis
Asteraceae (Composite family)
Rosette of narrow leaves with a long narrow tip, bearing difficulty widely-spaced 2.
narrow QUICK lobes: CHECK: wavy branching stem with a few yellow flowerheads. ID
Perennial with a rosette, or multiple rosettes from a forking root crown.
DESCRIPTION: linear, tapered at both ends, to 8" (20 cm) long, pinnately lobed, the tip long the
and Leaves nearly The lobes are well-spaced, narrow but blunt, pointing perpendicular to
midvein narrow. or slightly forward. The sinuses are of uniform depth and do not come close to
the midvein, giving the appearance of a narrow leaf with lobes added to the exterior rather
than a wide leaf with sinuses cut into it. The blades may be hairless or have scattered, long hairs. Petioles are
absent. or winged, depending on how you think of it. Midvein light, narrow, flat to raised above and rounded
below. Other veins are obscure. Margins have lobes but no teeth. Stems 1-several per rosette, 6-24" (15-60 cm)
tall, 2~4 mm thick, often curved at the base, mostly hairless, finely ridged,
hollow, few-branched or unbranched. The stem may bear a few reduced,
narrow, entire leaves. Inflorescence a cluster of a few heads on long
peduncles that are enlarged and hollow just before the flowerhead, the
involucre hairy. Heads about 1" (2.5 cm) across, yellow and dandelion-like
but with fewer rays, blooming in late summer and fall. The ball of fluffy
parachuted seeds is smaller than that of dandelion and irregular in form.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Leaves are narrower than those of hairy cat's
ear and not as hairy. The related Leontodon saxitilis is edible but even
worse; it has densely hairy leaves with shorter, blunter lobes.
HABITAT: Sunny, open areas under long-term disturbance: lawns, parks,
pastures, fields, roadsides. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Gather leaves when young and tender, from spring through
fall. They can be used in salads or fried.
COMMENTS: This is perhaps the most bitter of the dandelion-like
leaves I've covered here. Use them sparingly or in some way that allevi-
ates that bitterness.
FLOWERING STEM.LEAFLESS, 8 Fall dandelion Leontodon autumnalis Asteraceae (Composite family) Rosette of narrow leaves with a long narrow tip, bearing difficulty widely-spaced 2. narrow QUICK lobes: CHECK: wavy branching stem with a few yellow flowerheads. ID Perennial with a rosette, or multiple rosettes from a forking root crown. DESCRIPTION: linear, tapered at both ends, to 8" (20 cm) long, pinnately lobed, the tip long the and Leaves nearly The lobes are well-spaced, narrow but blunt, pointing perpendicular to midvein narrow. or slightly forward. The sinuses are of uniform depth and do not come close to the midvein, giving the appearance of a narrow leaf with lobes added to the exterior rather than a wide leaf with sinuses cut into it. The blades may be hairless or have scattered, long hairs. Petioles are absent. or winged, depending on how you think of it. Midvein light, narrow, flat to raised above and rounded below. Other veins are obscure. Margins have lobes but no teeth. Stems 1-several per rosette, 6-24" (15-60 cm) tall, 2~4 mm thick, often curved at the base, mostly hairless, finely ridged, hollow, few-branched or unbranched. The stem may bear a few reduced, narrow, entire leaves. Inflorescence a cluster of a few heads on long peduncles that are enlarged and hollow just before the flowerhead, the involucre hairy. Heads about 1" (2.5 cm) across, yellow and dandelion-like but with fewer rays, blooming in late summer and fall. The ball of fluffy parachuted seeds is smaller than that of dandelion and irregular in form. CONFUSING PLANTS: Leaves are narrower than those of hairy cat's ear and not as hairy. The related Leontodon saxitilis is edible but even worse; it has densely hairy leaves with shorter, blunter lobes. HABITAT: Sunny, open areas under long-term disturbance: lawns, parks, pastures, fields, roadsides. Introduced. FOOD USE: Gather leaves when young and tender, from spring through fall. They can be used in salads or fried. COMMENTS: This is perhaps the most bitter of the dandelion-like leaves I've covered here. Use them sparingly or in some way that allevi- ates that bitterness. 