min
0
1cm
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED
Gumbo-lily
1
1
Oenothera caespitosa
Onagraceae (Evening primrose family)
QUICK CHECK: Rosettes of coarsely, irregularly toothed leaves on noon clay,
white to pink 4-petaled flowers attached directly to the crown. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a taproot, older plants with multiple crowns Root thick at
the crown, tapering downward for 2-3" (5-8 cm), thickening again where the root branches
meet, then tapering and branching again, 0.6-1" (15-25 mm) wide at its thickest point. Root
skin peels in a distinct layer; inside is white flesh in two layers. Rosettes of numerous
leaves, often adjacent and overlapping, the crowns sometimes raised slightly above the soil surface on short
branches, these with 2 faint ridges. Leaves 3-6" (8-15 mm) long, semi-succulent, elliptic to narrowly e'liptic the
tips blunt or pointed, the bases gently tapered, the surface with fine, short, appressed hair. especially above
Margins may be entire but more often have large scattered teeth or small lobes; a few will have larger obes
Midvein light, not depressed, protruding below but not keeled. Secondary veins about 40°, 3-4 per side. not
depressed. Petioles about 30% of blade length, D-shaped, flat above with short, sparse hairs, winged nearly to
base (it is hard to say where the petiole ends and the blade begins). Flowers (early to mid summer. blooming
mostly at night) are attached directly to the crown by a narrow tube 2-2.5" (5-6.5 cm) long, widening toward
the flower. There are 5 narrow, pointed sepals about 1.2" (3 cm) long, finely hairy on the back. Petals (m)
long, whitish becoming dull pink, narrow at the base, the tips broad, overlapping, and bluntly 2-lobed There
are 8 protruding yellow stamens 1" (2.5 cm) long. Fruit is a tapering cylindrical pod about 1" (2.5 ong
with a blunt, depressed tip, the base angled by bumpy ridges, enclosing many small, slightly curved seeds
HABITAT: Dry, bare clay in full sun, generally with little competition. These sites are often created by erosion:
badlands, steep slopes, roadbanks, river banks, clay flats. Native.
FOOD USE: Roots are best when the plants are dormant, much better cooked (and stillnot very good) Young
leaves are marginally edible. Flowers and flower buds are also edible. This species tastes similar to the com-
mon evening primrose but its leaves are stronger and its rocts
are milder but tougher. Conservation 3/1/1.
COMMENTS: Because this plant is long-lived and its root S
marginal food, think carefully before digging one up. This is no:
a lily. The name refers not to soup, but to its occurrence on sticky
"gumbo" clay. This is one of the many amazing wildilowers you
will likely see if you visit Yellowstone in early summer. AKA desert
evening primrose, tufted evening primrose
283
min 0 1cm FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED Gumbo-lily 1 1 Oenothera caespitosa Onagraceae (Evening primrose family) QUICK CHECK: Rosettes of coarsely, irregularly toothed leaves on noon clay, white to pink 4-petaled flowers attached directly to the crown. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a taproot, older plants with multiple crowns Root thick at the crown, tapering downward for 2-3" (5-8 cm), thickening again where the root branches meet, then tapering and branching again, 0.6-1" (15-25 mm) wide at its thickest point. Root skin peels in a distinct layer; inside is white flesh in two layers. Rosettes of numerous leaves, often adjacent and overlapping, the crowns sometimes raised slightly above the soil surface on short branches, these with 2 faint ridges. Leaves 3-6" (8-15 mm) long, semi-succulent, elliptic to narrowly e'liptic the tips blunt or pointed, the bases gently tapered, the surface with fine, short, appressed hair. especially above Margins may be entire but more often have large scattered teeth or small lobes; a few will have larger obes Midvein light, not depressed, protruding below but not keeled. Secondary veins about 40°, 3-4 per side. not depressed. Petioles about 30% of blade length, D-shaped, flat above with short, sparse hairs, winged nearly to base (it is hard to say where the petiole ends and the blade begins). Flowers (early to mid summer. blooming mostly at night) are attached directly to the crown by a narrow tube 2-2.5" (5-6.5 cm) long, widening toward the flower. There are 5 narrow, pointed sepals about 1.2" (3 cm) long, finely hairy on the back. Petals (m) long, whitish becoming dull pink, narrow at the base, the tips broad, overlapping, and bluntly 2-lobed There are 8 protruding yellow stamens 1" (2.5 cm) long. Fruit is a tapering cylindrical pod about 1" (2.5 ong with a blunt, depressed tip, the base angled by bumpy ridges, enclosing many small, slightly curved seeds HABITAT: Dry, bare clay in full sun, generally with little competition. These sites are often created by erosion: badlands, steep slopes, roadbanks, river banks, clay flats. Native. FOOD USE: Roots are best when the plants are dormant, much better cooked (and stillnot very good) Young leaves are marginally edible. Flowers and flower buds are also edible. This species tastes similar to the com- mon evening primrose but its leaves are stronger and its rocts are milder but tougher. Conservation 3/1/1. COMMENTS: Because this plant is long-lived and its root S marginal food, think carefully before digging one up. This is no: a lily. The name refers not to soup, but to its occurrence on sticky "gumbo" clay. This is one of the many amazing wildilowers you will likely see if you visit Yellowstone in early summer. AKA desert evening primrose, tufted evening primrose 283 