0
1cm
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED
of flowers at the hp, Flowers mm
across with green centers and whitish
to occ asionally reddish, narrowly elliptic
or lanceolate petals. remote from each
other, spreading, the stamens with yellow
to orange anthers, also widely spreading.
Fruit a small capsule of tiny seeds
HABITAT: Wooded swamps, ravines,
stream edges, and other low areas where
soil is disturbed, mostly in light shade
Commonly associated with marsh-
marigold. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather flower stalk shoots
in mid spring before the inflorescence
has begun to branch; later they will be
tough and bitter (the tops are always bit
ter). Shoots can be eaten cooked but are
especially good raw. The young leaves
are supposedly edible but are tough and
astringent. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: These flower stalk shoots are an ephemeral springtime treat for foragers, 50 crisp they croak
when picked, so juicy you can sometimes drink from the hollow stem if you pinch the base when you pick it.
Luckily I have thousands growing in the ditch near my cabin. AKA Micranthes pensylvanica.
Related edible:
12 Brook saxifrage Saxifraga micranthidifolia
1
3
QUICK CHECK: Along mountain brooks and seeps; narrow leaves with sharp teeth at
right angles to the margin; thin, erect, hairy stalk. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Leaves 3-12" (8-30 cm) long, light green, erect to ascending, narrower
than swamp saxifrage, tapered to the base, very thin, the surfaces hairless. The midvein
is more strongly depressed but the veinlets are raised above. Margins hairy with promi-
nent sharp teeth oriented perpendicular to the margin and abruptly constricted to sharp
points. Petiole flat, broadly winged, 15-70% of blade length. Stem 12-32' (30-80 cm) tall and 6-9 mm smaller wide,
also densely hairy. The slightly
panicles bloom earlier in spring; the pet-
als are white with a small yellow spot
near the base.
HABITAT: In the Appalachians along
rocky springs, seepages, swamps, and
brooks in wooded environments Native.
FOOD USE: Tender spring greens are
astringent and best boiled and drained,
or fried. The shoots are milder in flavor
and are pleasant raw. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: Lettuce saxifrage leaves
are bitter like those of swamp saxifrage
but thinner and more tender they The can
be realistically rendered enjoyable
plant is limited in distribution but often
abundant within its limited habitat brook
very AKA Micranthes micranthidifolia,
lettue e, deer tongue.
285
0 1cm FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED of flowers at the hp, Flowers mm across with green centers and whitish to occ asionally reddish, narrowly elliptic or lanceolate petals. remote from each other, spreading, the stamens with yellow to orange anthers, also widely spreading. Fruit a small capsule of tiny seeds HABITAT: Wooded swamps, ravines, stream edges, and other low areas where soil is disturbed, mostly in light shade Commonly associated with marsh- marigold. Native. FOOD USE: Gather flower stalk shoots in mid spring before the inflorescence has begun to branch; later they will be tough and bitter (the tops are always bit ter). Shoots can be eaten cooked but are especially good raw. The young leaves are supposedly edible but are tough and astringent. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: These flower stalk shoots are an ephemeral springtime treat for foragers, 50 crisp they croak when picked, so juicy you can sometimes drink from the hollow stem if you pinch the base when you pick it. Luckily I have thousands growing in the ditch near my cabin. AKA Micranthes pensylvanica. Related edible: 12 Brook saxifrage Saxifraga micranthidifolia 1 3 QUICK CHECK: Along mountain brooks and seeps; narrow leaves with sharp teeth at right angles to the margin; thin, erect, hairy stalk. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Leaves 3-12" (8-30 cm) long, light green, erect to ascending, narrower than swamp saxifrage, tapered to the base, very thin, the surfaces hairless. The midvein is more strongly depressed but the veinlets are raised above. Margins hairy with promi- nent sharp teeth oriented perpendicular to the margin and abruptly constricted to sharp points. Petiole flat, broadly winged, 15-70% of blade length. Stem 12-32' (30-80 cm) tall and 6-9 mm smaller wide, also densely hairy. The slightly panicles bloom earlier in spring; the pet- als are white with a small yellow spot near the base. HABITAT: In the Appalachians along rocky springs, seepages, swamps, and brooks in wooded environments Native. FOOD USE: Tender spring greens are astringent and best boiled and drained, or fried. The shoots are milder in flavor and are pleasant raw. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: Lettuce saxifrage leaves are bitter like those of swamp saxifrage but thinner and more tender they The can be realistically rendered enjoyable plant is limited in distribution but often abundant within its limited habitat brook very AKA Micranthes micranthidifolia, lettue e, deer tongue. 285 