FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED
10 English daisy
Bellis perennis Asteraceae 1 (Composite family)
QUICK CHECK: A single flowerhead with white rays and a yellow disk on a short leafless
stalk with spoon-shaped basal leaves. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: and pastures. Leaves all basal, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, blunt-tipped, semi-succulent,
Low perennial herb with fibrous roots spreading by rhizome to spoon form
shaped, colonies tapering in lawns to the base, with scattered hairs or hairless, thick and gently and
rosettes depressed but other veins are flat above. Margins have scattered with long white hairs;
mostly ground-hugging. Midvein may be
occasionally broadly they are entire but more often they have a few teeth tipped
nipples. Petioles broad, flat, green to reddish, 50-80% of blade length. Scapes usu-
ally multiple, finely hairy, 2-8" (5-20 cm) tall, not round in cross section (erratically
angled with a tiny, angled hollow). Inflorescence a single flat flowerhead about 0.8"
(2 cm) wide. The rays are several times longer than wide, broader at the tip (which
is rounded to truncated), white except for a tinge of purple on the back near the tip;
the disk is convex and yellow. Seeds dark, flat, lacking a parachute.
HABITAT: Primarily lawns. Occasionally pastures, meadows, roadsides, gardens.
Introduced.
FOOD USE: Gather tender leaves any time during the growing season, the flowers
in spring and early summer. Eat these sparingly raw or cooked as the flavor is rather
strong.
COMMENTS: This plant is more of a seasoning than a vegetable, as it is highly
aromatic like ox-eye daisy-which has similar but much larger flowers. It is highly
sporadic in occurrence and, while locally abundant, is not particularly common.
11 Swamp saxifrage
1
3
FH-205
Saxifraga pensylvanica family Saxifragaceae
QUICK CHECK: Large, broad, thick leaves; a single thick, hollow, hairy stalk. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial, the taproot often splitting to form multiple adjacent crowns
but not spreading by rhizome. Leaves basal, in a rosette, ovate or usually broadly elliptic,
to 12" (30 cm) long, blunt-tipped, often hugging the ground, thick but not leathery, often
wavy or ruffled, sometimes nearly hairless but usually with long erect hairs on both
sides. Leaves are narrowed to
the base but there is no clear place where the blade
ends and the petiole begins; if there is a petiole it
short and broadly winged. Midvein above is light im
color, prominent, broadly and shallowly depressed;
secondary veins are crowded near the base of the
blade at low angles, nearly flat on both sides. Mar-
gins often entire on the first spring leaves but wavy
or shallowly toothed on larger leaves, the tooth tips
darkened and nipple-like. Stalk erect, single, up to
4' (1.2 m) tall and 0.2-0.8" (5-20 mm) thick, hol-
and low with thin walls, rounded, green, brittle, densely
There uniformly covered with long, slightly sticky hairs.
is a linear bract under each branch of the
inflorescence, but these are not always evident
tall, on shoots. Inflorescence a panicle, wider than
that commences blooming when still rather
densely are packed; at maturity the individual branches
widely spaced, each with a crowded bunch
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED 10 English daisy Bellis perennis Asteraceae 1 (Composite family) QUICK CHECK: A single flowerhead with white rays and a yellow disk on a short leafless stalk with spoon-shaped basal leaves. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: and pastures. Leaves all basal, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, blunt-tipped, semi-succulent, Low perennial herb with fibrous roots spreading by rhizome to spoon form shaped, colonies tapering in lawns to the base, with scattered hairs or hairless, thick and gently and rosettes depressed but other veins are flat above. Margins have scattered with long white hairs; mostly ground-hugging. Midvein may be occasionally broadly they are entire but more often they have a few teeth tipped nipples. Petioles broad, flat, green to reddish, 50-80% of blade length. Scapes usu- ally multiple, finely hairy, 2-8" (5-20 cm) tall, not round in cross section (erratically angled with a tiny, angled hollow). Inflorescence a single flat flowerhead about 0.8" (2 cm) wide. The rays are several times longer than wide, broader at the tip (which is rounded to truncated), white except for a tinge of purple on the back near the tip; the disk is convex and yellow. Seeds dark, flat, lacking a parachute. HABITAT: Primarily lawns. Occasionally pastures, meadows, roadsides, gardens. Introduced. FOOD USE: Gather tender leaves any time during the growing season, the flowers in spring and early summer. Eat these sparingly raw or cooked as the flavor is rather strong. COMMENTS: This plant is more of a seasoning than a vegetable, as it is highly aromatic like ox-eye daisy-which has similar but much larger flowers. It is highly sporadic in occurrence and, while locally abundant, is not particularly common. 11 Swamp saxifrage 1 3 FH-205 Saxifraga pensylvanica family Saxifragaceae QUICK CHECK: Large, broad, thick leaves; a single thick, hollow, hairy stalk. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial, the taproot often splitting to form multiple adjacent crowns but not spreading by rhizome. Leaves basal, in a rosette, ovate or usually broadly elliptic, to 12" (30 cm) long, blunt-tipped, often hugging the ground, thick but not leathery, often wavy or ruffled, sometimes nearly hairless but usually with long erect hairs on both sides. Leaves are narrowed to the base but there is no clear place where the blade ends and the petiole begins; if there is a petiole it short and broadly winged. Midvein above is light im color, prominent, broadly and shallowly depressed; secondary veins are crowded near the base of the blade at low angles, nearly flat on both sides. Mar- gins often entire on the first spring leaves but wavy or shallowly toothed on larger leaves, the tooth tips darkened and nipple-like. Stalk erect, single, up to 4' (1.2 m) tall and 0.2-0.8" (5-20 mm) thick, hol- and low with thin walls, rounded, green, brittle, densely There uniformly covered with long, slightly sticky hairs. is a linear bract under each branch of the inflorescence, but these are not always evident tall, on shoots. Inflorescence a panicle, wider than that commences blooming when still rather densely are packed; at maturity the individual branches widely spaced, each with a crowded bunch 