FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOSED
13 Coltsfoot
1
2
(Composite
family)
Tussilago farfara
Asteraceae
CHECK: Thick, scaly flower stalk with a single yellow flowerhead difficulty before any 1.
leaves QUICK appear; large-toothed leaves shaped roughly like a horse's hoof. ID
DESCRIPTION: Perennial forming colonies by thin white rhizomes. Leaves basal or borne
short, raised, purplish stub. Blades 3-8" (8-20 cm) long and about equally wide,
roughly on a shaped like a horse's hoof (hence the name) but with a heart-shaped base and
many angles or short lobes, ruffled at first with light wool above, the veins flat above. With
age, leaves become flatter (but never totally flat) with veins depressed above. Surfaces of
mature leaves have small, scattered, erect hairs above; below they are whitish and densely woolly with promi-
nently protruding veins. Midvein dark purple at the base, this color sometimes extending up the major veins
a short distance. Besides the midvein there are 4-6 major veins from the base, plus two more shortly distal to
them; these run straight at first but after their first major fork zigzag to the margins where they end in a lobe
tip. Margins have irregularly sized, broad, nipple-tipped, outward-pointing teeth; on young leaves they are
downcurved and purple. First spring leaves are usually paired, appearing as the seedheads are going to fluff.
Petioles 100-140% of blade length, out of plane with it, leaning, solid, D-shaped (shallowly depressed or chan-
neled on the flat side), reddish (especially the channel ridges), flared at base, with soft hairs and multiple cords
inside. The petiole of one leaf in a pair clasps the other. Stems hollow, unbranched, often clumped, emerging
from the ground at a location separate from the leaves, 4-10" (10-25 cm) tall, 4-7 mm thick, wavy, with short
gland-tipped hairs and a cobwebby coating; finely ridged, the ridges often purple, with numerous triangular,
clasping, scale-leaves about 0.8" (2 cm) long. Sap is clear. Heads borne singly (early spring, before or as the
leaves emerge), about 1" (2.5 cm) across, with numerous purple bracts. Heads droop before going to gray fluff.
Florets bright yellow, the rays very narrow; there are some disk florets with 5 spreading lobes in the center,
HABITAT: Moist but often well-drained soil that has been disturbed-especially rocky areas of high-calcium
stone. In shade or full sun. Common along railroad tracks and roads. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Flower stalk shoots before or during blooming in early spring can be eaten raw or cooked. They
young only, boil and drain before eating. Leaves are best when
are tender, leaves mildly sweet, slightly astringent, and better with the scale-leaves stripped off. Later in spring, pick
young but not super young-wait until after the wool becomes less
prominent on the upper surface.
COMMENTS: This plant is unusual in that its flowers appear on a
stem separately from the leaves. Coltsfoot is well known and highly
regarded as a medicinal herb, but as a food it is just mediocre.
286
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOSED 13 Coltsfoot 1 2 (Composite family) Tussilago farfara Asteraceae CHECK: Thick, scaly flower stalk with a single yellow flowerhead difficulty before any 1. leaves QUICK appear; large-toothed leaves shaped roughly like a horse's hoof. ID DESCRIPTION: Perennial forming colonies by thin white rhizomes. Leaves basal or borne short, raised, purplish stub. Blades 3-8" (8-20 cm) long and about equally wide, roughly on a shaped like a horse's hoof (hence the name) but with a heart-shaped base and many angles or short lobes, ruffled at first with light wool above, the veins flat above. With age, leaves become flatter (but never totally flat) with veins depressed above. Surfaces of mature leaves have small, scattered, erect hairs above; below they are whitish and densely woolly with promi- nently protruding veins. Midvein dark purple at the base, this color sometimes extending up the major veins a short distance. Besides the midvein there are 4-6 major veins from the base, plus two more shortly distal to them; these run straight at first but after their first major fork zigzag to the margins where they end in a lobe tip. Margins have irregularly sized, broad, nipple-tipped, outward-pointing teeth; on young leaves they are downcurved and purple. First spring leaves are usually paired, appearing as the seedheads are going to fluff. Petioles 100-140% of blade length, out of plane with it, leaning, solid, D-shaped (shallowly depressed or chan- neled on the flat side), reddish (especially the channel ridges), flared at base, with soft hairs and multiple cords inside. The petiole of one leaf in a pair clasps the other. Stems hollow, unbranched, often clumped, emerging from the ground at a location separate from the leaves, 4-10" (10-25 cm) tall, 4-7 mm thick, wavy, with short gland-tipped hairs and a cobwebby coating; finely ridged, the ridges often purple, with numerous triangular, clasping, scale-leaves about 0.8" (2 cm) long. Sap is clear. Heads borne singly (early spring, before or as the leaves emerge), about 1" (2.5 cm) across, with numerous purple bracts. Heads droop before going to gray fluff. Florets bright yellow, the rays very narrow; there are some disk florets with 5 spreading lobes in the center, HABITAT: Moist but often well-drained soil that has been disturbed-especially rocky areas of high-calcium stone. In shade or full sun. Common along railroad tracks and roads. Introduced. FOOD USE: Flower stalk shoots before or during blooming in early spring can be eaten raw or cooked. They young only, boil and drain before eating. Leaves are best when are tender, leaves mildly sweet, slightly astringent, and better with the scale-leaves stripped off. Later in spring, pick young but not super young-wait until after the wool becomes less prominent on the upper surface. COMMENTS: This plant is unusual in that its flowers appear on a stem separately from the leaves. Coltsfoot is well known and highly regarded as a medicinal herb, but as a food it is just mediocre. 286 