FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED
14 Northern coltsfoot
1
2
Petasites frigidus Asteraceae (Composite family)
stem with multiple white heads on top. ID difficulty 1.
CK CHECK: Single, large, deeply palmately lobed leaf; stout, unbranched Flower
DESCRIPTION: Leaves single or paired, wider than long, 4-12" (10-30 across,
palmately lobed with 7-9 major lobes, these pointed, widest in the middle, with occasional deeply
sub-lobes. Surface light green with fine, soft hairs on top; finely woolly below. Veins radi-
ate from the base, the larger ones strongly depressed above and protruding below. Mar-
gins hairy with a few large, scattered teeth, each with an extended claw-like point. Petioles soft-hairy, solid,
deeper than wide, not keeled, with a shallow, narrow channel with thin maroon margin stripes. Stalk in
early spring before the leaves, thick for its height and unbranched below the inflorescence, reaching appears 10-26"
(25-66 cm) tall. By the time this full height is reached in early summer the leaves have emerged. Stalks are
covered with erect to ascending bracts (reduced. modified
leaves) that are broadest at the base, tapered to a sharp tip,
cupped, slightly woolly, 0.7-1.3" (18-33 mm) long, purple at
first but eventually turning green. Inflorescence (male and
female normally separate, but occasionally mixed) crowded
toward the top, a raceme of many white composite heads
on long peduncles, each head 0.6-o.8" (15-20 mm) across
with numerous florets. Female heads have blunt, broad-
tipped rays on the outside of the head and 5-petaled disk
florets in the center. Male heads have numerous filaments
like a bottle brush. Seed heads are fluffy, grayish-white,
beard-like.
HABITAT: Canopy openings in boreal forest, especially
under birch and aspen, and especially on rocky soils. Native.
FOOD USE: Young leaves are barely edible. They were
reportedly burned and used as a salt substitute- have not
tried this. The flower stalk shoots in early spring, before the
peduncles elongate and the heads open, are tender but have
an aromatic, sweet but almost soapy flavor. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: I have not yet found a really good way to
prepare these due to the strong flavor, but there must be
one. The plant can live for decades before flowering.
287
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED 14 Northern coltsfoot 1 2 Petasites frigidus Asteraceae (Composite family) stem with multiple white heads on top. ID difficulty 1. CK CHECK: Single, large, deeply palmately lobed leaf; stout, unbranched Flower DESCRIPTION: Leaves single or paired, wider than long, 4-12" (10-30 across, palmately lobed with 7-9 major lobes, these pointed, widest in the middle, with occasional deeply sub-lobes. Surface light green with fine, soft hairs on top; finely woolly below. Veins radi- ate from the base, the larger ones strongly depressed above and protruding below. Mar- gins hairy with a few large, scattered teeth, each with an extended claw-like point. Petioles soft-hairy, solid, deeper than wide, not keeled, with a shallow, narrow channel with thin maroon margin stripes. Stalk in early spring before the leaves, thick for its height and unbranched below the inflorescence, reaching appears 10-26" (25-66 cm) tall. By the time this full height is reached in early summer the leaves have emerged. Stalks are covered with erect to ascending bracts (reduced. modified leaves) that are broadest at the base, tapered to a sharp tip, cupped, slightly woolly, 0.7-1.3" (18-33 mm) long, purple at first but eventually turning green. Inflorescence (male and female normally separate, but occasionally mixed) crowded toward the top, a raceme of many white composite heads on long peduncles, each head 0.6-o.8" (15-20 mm) across with numerous florets. Female heads have blunt, broad- tipped rays on the outside of the head and 5-petaled disk florets in the center. Male heads have numerous filaments like a bottle brush. Seed heads are fluffy, grayish-white, beard-like. HABITAT: Canopy openings in boreal forest, especially under birch and aspen, and especially on rocky soils. Native. FOOD USE: Young leaves are barely edible. They were reportedly burned and used as a salt substitute- have not tried this. The flower stalk shoots in early spring, before the peduncles elongate and the heads open, are tender but have an aromatic, sweet but almost soapy flavor. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: I have not yet found a really good way to prepare these due to the strong flavor, but there must be one. The plant can live for decades before flowering. 287 