FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED
aceae (Ginseng t family)
16 Coinicaf
2
Centella erecta Apiaceae (Carrot family)
QUICK CHECK: Small rosette of a few broad, toothed leaves on long Datiolas inemina
Leaves
compets over the ground; flowers in tiny umbels near the ground. ID difficulty 1,
Margins
Veins
DESCRIPTION: Perennial evergreen forming colonies by slender rhizomes growing at or
just beneath the ground level. Nodes are widely spaced, rooting and producing clumps of
2-4 leaves. Leaves slightly succulent, oblong to roundish, 0.6-3" (1.5-8 cm) long, the base
cordate or with a triangular cutout, the tip rounded, Surfaces glossy, hairless or with long
soft hairs mostly near the margins. All major veins emanate from the base, faintly depressed above; only the
Inflorescence :
midvein is strongly protruding below, occasionally darkened maroon. Margins sometimes maroon. wavy or
with a few shallow, blunt, widely spaced teeth, these usually with a light-colored nipple. Petioles reddish, fleshy
with a narrow channel, erect to leaning, attached at the edge of the blade (not peltate), hairy, 60% of blade
Ength on lawn plants but much longer in unmowed vegetation, sometimes reaching 14" (36 cm) in crowded
wetland margins. Inflorescence a tiny crowded umbel of 3-9 on a straight, erect, solitary, hairy peduncle 1-4"
(2.5-10 cm) tall, growing directly from the rhizome at a node and not rising above the leaves. The pedicels are
extremely short and there is a pair of thick, short bracts beneath the umbel. Flowers (summer) 2 mm across
with 5 narrow petals, whitish tinted with green or pink, incurved at the tip. Sepals absent. Fruit flattened with
conspicuous ridges, not fleshy.
HABIT T Sunny to partly shaded areas with moist soil and little tall herbaceous cover, often disturbed. Lawns
(especially along waterways), edges of waterways and marshes, swamps, fens, seepage areas, interdune
swales, beaver meadows, ditches, low spots in pine flatwoods. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender new leaves can be nibbled raw or used in salads. More commonly used in smoothies or
the leaves steeped for tea. Con-
servation 1.
COMMENTS: This is sometimes
considered the same species as
the gotu kola of East Asia: the
North American populations are
only subtly different. Gotu kola is
used in herbal medicine to pro-
mote wound healing (especially
burns), vascular health, and also as
a memory enhancer or brain tonic.
AKA spadeleaf Centella asiatica
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES TOOTHED OR LOBED aceae (Ginseng t family) 16 Coinicaf 2 Centella erecta Apiaceae (Carrot family) QUICK CHECK: Small rosette of a few broad, toothed leaves on long Datiolas inemina Leaves compets over the ground; flowers in tiny umbels near the ground. ID difficulty 1, Margins Veins DESCRIPTION: Perennial evergreen forming colonies by slender rhizomes growing at or just beneath the ground level. Nodes are widely spaced, rooting and producing clumps of 2-4 leaves. Leaves slightly succulent, oblong to roundish, 0.6-3" (1.5-8 cm) long, the base cordate or with a triangular cutout, the tip rounded, Surfaces glossy, hairless or with long soft hairs mostly near the margins. All major veins emanate from the base, faintly depressed above; only the Inflorescence : midvein is strongly protruding below, occasionally darkened maroon. Margins sometimes maroon. wavy or with a few shallow, blunt, widely spaced teeth, these usually with a light-colored nipple. Petioles reddish, fleshy with a narrow channel, erect to leaning, attached at the edge of the blade (not peltate), hairy, 60% of blade Ength on lawn plants but much longer in unmowed vegetation, sometimes reaching 14" (36 cm) in crowded wetland margins. Inflorescence a tiny crowded umbel of 3-9 on a straight, erect, solitary, hairy peduncle 1-4" (2.5-10 cm) tall, growing directly from the rhizome at a node and not rising above the leaves. The pedicels are extremely short and there is a pair of thick, short bracts beneath the umbel. Flowers (summer) 2 mm across with 5 narrow petals, whitish tinted with green or pink, incurved at the tip. Sepals absent. Fruit flattened with conspicuous ridges, not fleshy. HABIT T Sunny to partly shaded areas with moist soil and little tall herbaceous cover, often disturbed. Lawns (especially along waterways), edges of waterways and marshes, swamps, fens, seepage areas, interdune swales, beaver meadows, ditches, low spots in pine flatwoods. Native. FOOD USE: Tender new leaves can be nibbled raw or used in salads. More commonly used in smoothies or the leaves steeped for tea. Con- servation 1. COMMENTS: This is sometimes considered the same species as the gotu kola of East Asia: the North American populations are only subtly different. Gotu kola is used in herbal medicine to pro- mote wound healing (especially burns), vascular health, and also as a memory enhancer or brain tonic. AKA spadeleaf Centella asiatica 