FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS,
15 Beach
Hydrocotyle pennywort bonariensis 1 Araliaceae (Ginseng family) white
CHECK: Flat, shiny, scallop-edged leaves in ground-hugging colonies; tiny
flowers in a perennial that creeps by rhizomes. roundish Leaves to single, slightly on
QUICK compound umbel. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Ground-hugging the blades flat, thick, very glossy, radiate from
petioles directly from cm) the across, rhizome, hairless, with a light spot in the center. with Veins blunt, rounded
oblong, 1-5" straight, (2.5-13 faintly raised above and flat below. Margins in wavy competi-
the center, the waves. Petioles 2-14" (5-36 cm) long (much taller or
teeth on smooth, hairless, solid, 2-4 mm thick, rounded with Inflorescence no grooves a
tion), erect or decumbent, attached in the middle of the blade. branching
compound ridges, umbel, at first looking like a small, simple umbel but
into a large multi-compound
structure, the scape rounded
Hydrocotyle verticillata has stacked umbels.
and solid. Flowers 2-3 mm
Hydrocotyle bonariensis compound
across with a green center
umbel, just beginning to expand.
and 5 triangular white pet-
als. Fruit flattened, larger
than the flowers.
HABITAT: Sunny, moist,
disturbed, often sandy
soil. Lawns, beaches, pond
edges, roadsides. Native.
FOOD USE: Leaves and
their petioles can be eaten
raw in salad, cooked in many
ways, blended in smoothies,
or used to make a tea. New
leaves are best but older
leaves are serviceable, and
are available all year. Con-
servation 1.
COMMENTS: The flavor
is faintly celery-like. This
is one of the most ubiqui-
tous wild edibles of the Gulf
Coast region, often abun-
dant in urban areas.
RELATED EDIBLES: Oth-
er members of the genus
Hydrocotyle look and taste
similar and can also be used;
because of their differences
in form and habitat, they may
be found in groups 15 and
37 (p. 221 and p. 620). Sim-
ilar to beach pennywort is
whorled pennywort H. ver-
ticillata, which has smaller
leaves and is more common
inland, and has stacked um-
bels or whorls rather than
compound umbels
288
Beach pennywort, young leaves
Hydrocotyle verticillata leaf.
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, 15 Beach Hydrocotyle pennywort bonariensis 1 Araliaceae (Ginseng family) white CHECK: Flat, shiny, scallop-edged leaves in ground-hugging colonies; tiny flowers in a perennial that creeps by rhizomes. roundish Leaves to single, slightly on QUICK compound umbel. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Ground-hugging the blades flat, thick, very glossy, radiate from petioles directly from cm) the across, rhizome, hairless, with a light spot in the center. with Veins blunt, rounded oblong, 1-5" straight, (2.5-13 faintly raised above and flat below. Margins in wavy competi- the center, the waves. Petioles 2-14" (5-36 cm) long (much taller or teeth on smooth, hairless, solid, 2-4 mm thick, rounded with Inflorescence no grooves a tion), erect or decumbent, attached in the middle of the blade. branching compound ridges, umbel, at first looking like a small, simple umbel but into a large multi-compound structure, the scape rounded Hydrocotyle verticillata has stacked umbels. and solid. Flowers 2-3 mm Hydrocotyle bonariensis compound across with a green center umbel, just beginning to expand. and 5 triangular white pet- als. Fruit flattened, larger than the flowers. HABITAT: Sunny, moist, disturbed, often sandy soil. Lawns, beaches, pond edges, roadsides. Native. FOOD USE: Leaves and their petioles can be eaten raw in salad, cooked in many ways, blended in smoothies, or used to make a tea. New leaves are best but older leaves are serviceable, and are available all year. Con- servation 1. COMMENTS: The flavor is faintly celery-like. This is one of the most ubiqui- tous wild edibles of the Gulf Coast region, often abun- dant in urban areas. RELATED EDIBLES: Oth- er members of the genus Hydrocotyle look and taste similar and can also be used; because of their differences in form and habitat, they may be found in groups 15 and 37 (p. 221 and p. 620). Sim- ilar to beach pennywort is whorled pennywort H. ver- ticillata, which has smaller leaves and is more common inland, and has stacked um- bels or whorls rather than compound umbels 288 Beach pennywort, young leaves Hydrocotyle verticillata leaf. 