BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND
faces borne elow. have in Margins plane scattered roughly short parallel hair to on the both ground, sides. Major 2-7" (5-18 veins cm) long, ovate to ellino the
from channeled, a small a woody sheath red-purple, base at the that base solid, may serrated (that stick 4-6 withers mm with slightly thick long, by above and maturity). narrow, up the to ground, 28" sharp Leaf (70 shoot teeth cm) smooth, veinlets tall, pointing with not
densely and are toward depressed thelip above Petioles acurcinate and proce irling Sur
with fine wool, the folded leaf cluster at the shoot's top hairy on all covered
Scapes single, erect, solid, straight, borne on a woody base beside parts.
petiole but somewhat shorter, the surface smooth and soft-hairy. Inflores- a
cence 1-3 tight, ball-like umbels about 1.4" (3.5 cm) in diameter. Flowers
(early summer) numerous, white, 2-3 mm across, with stamens radiating
far beyond the five petals. Berry spherical, 3-4 mm, with calyx remnants at
the tip, ripening to purple-black in mid summer, containing several seeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Young shoots can be confused with those of red
baneberry (p. 676), which sometimes grow beside it and emerge at about
the same time. This may be the most difficult distinction between a poison
ous and edible plant in our region! Baneberry shoots (the stem part) are
glaucous and hairless with a pinhole hollow in the center; the folded leaf
clusters are slightly hairy, with the hair on the bottom of the blades only.
Flowering shoots show a cluster of flower buds on a small branch borne
below the primary leaf division. Baneberry does not emanate from a woody
base. Sarsaparilla is often mistaken for ginseng, to which it is related, but
the flowers of ginseng are borne on the same stem as the leaves.
HABITAT: Dry or young forests that cast light to moderate shade, espe-
cially pine, oak, birch, or aspen. Becomes more common after logging or
fire. Native.
FOOD USE: Rhizomes can be collected at any time and boiled to make a
weak-flavored drink. Young shoots of petioles, before the leaves open up,
make a good raw snack with unique flavor. Berries can be nibbled only in
limited quantity due to the strong spicy, soapy flavor. Some people make
wine or jelly from them; I've tried both and liked neither. Conservation
3/2/1.
COMMENTS: This is one of the most abundant forest herbs in some
regions. While the drink from boiled rhizomes is the best-known way to
use this plant, it's not as exciting as the exotic name suggests.
BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND faces borne elow. have in Margins plane scattered roughly short parallel hair to on the both ground, sides. Major 2-7" (5-18 veins cm) long, ovate to ellino the from channeled, a small a woody sheath red-purple, base at the that base solid, may serrated (that stick 4-6 withers mm with slightly thick long, by above and maturity). narrow, up the to ground, 28" sharp Leaf (70 shoot teeth cm) smooth, veinlets tall, pointing with not densely and are toward depressed thelip above Petioles acurcinate and proce irling Sur with fine wool, the folded leaf cluster at the shoot's top hairy on all covered Scapes single, erect, solid, straight, borne on a woody base beside parts. petiole but somewhat shorter, the surface smooth and soft-hairy. Inflores- a cence 1-3 tight, ball-like umbels about 1.4" (3.5 cm) in diameter. Flowers (early summer) numerous, white, 2-3 mm across, with stamens radiating far beyond the five petals. Berry spherical, 3-4 mm, with calyx remnants at the tip, ripening to purple-black in mid summer, containing several seeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: Young shoots can be confused with those of red baneberry (p. 676), which sometimes grow beside it and emerge at about the same time. This may be the most difficult distinction between a poison ous and edible plant in our region! Baneberry shoots (the stem part) are glaucous and hairless with a pinhole hollow in the center; the folded leaf clusters are slightly hairy, with the hair on the bottom of the blades only. Flowering shoots show a cluster of flower buds on a small branch borne below the primary leaf division. Baneberry does not emanate from a woody base. Sarsaparilla is often mistaken for ginseng, to which it is related, but the flowers of ginseng are borne on the same stem as the leaves. HABITAT: Dry or young forests that cast light to moderate shade, espe- cially pine, oak, birch, or aspen. Becomes more common after logging or fire. Native. FOOD USE: Rhizomes can be collected at any time and boiled to make a weak-flavored drink. Young shoots of petioles, before the leaves open up, make a good raw snack with unique flavor. Berries can be nibbled only in limited quantity due to the strong spicy, soapy flavor. Some people make wine or jelly from them; I've tried both and liked neither. Conservation 3/2/1. COMMENTS: This is one of the most abundant forest herbs in some regions. While the drink from boiled rhizomes is the best-known way to use this plant, it's not as exciting as the exotic name suggests. 