FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES COMPOSHED
GROUP 20 BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND,
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS
physical form is largely an adaptation with a variety to full sun. of edible Group parts, 20 contains but
plants 8 This of the from 12 produce five different root carrot vegetables. families family The (Apiaceae) hardest members. species to of identify Despite these
the here reputation are plants of 3-6, this the family for difficulty when in and bloom danger, or fruit-the none tricky
resembles any dangerous the various species edibles from resemble each other. these (The Apiaceae very
part is differentiating hemlock (p. 671) can functional
young rosettes when not of in poison bloom.) Note that plants 3-6 do in not books have are highly
common names in helpful. There are two different genera biscuitroot,
plants English-the names you see with
variable and usually not and Cymopterus) that I am calling Also, plant
reflecting is included here despite normally having a stem, because that
soft edible the roots fact (Lomatium that foragers tend to think of them together. the stem is so short #6
most people will not notice it.
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 20
The key is not your final answer!
Leaves single, more than 12" (30 cm) long, widely spaced, 2 or 3 times compound with distinct
1. Wild sarsaparilla
ovate or obovate leaflets.
or
Leaves single, less than 1" (2.5 cm) long, closely spaced along a rhizome, carpet-forming, ternately
2. White clover
compound, with tiny teeth and chevron markings.
or
Leaves in rosettes or clumps.
Leaves multi-compound and lacy with indistinct divisions.
Flowers yellow; fruit ribbed or ridged but not broadly winged.
3. Yellow prairie biscuitroot
Lobe tips rounded or abruptly pointed, petiole not channeled.
4. Thread-leaf musineon
or
Lobes thread-like with sharp tips; petiole broadly channeled.
or
Flowers white; fruit prominently winged.
5. Small winged biscuitroot
Leaves shiny.
Leaves dull grayish.
6. Large winged biscuitroot
Leaves once pinnately compound with toothed leaflets of 2 distinct alternating sizes.
7. Silverweed
or
Leaves ternately compound.
Leaflets elliptic or obovate, sharply toothed with depressed veins.
Fruit heart-shaped with the seeds in a pitted surface.
8. Common strawberry
or
or
Fruit pointed with the seeds in a non-pitted surface.
9. Woodland strawberry
Leaflets entire, creased and shaped like a paper heart.
10. Violet wood sorrel
Leaves palmately compound with 3-8 leaflets.
Leaves with 3-5 leaflets, densely halry on top.
11. Small prairie-turnip
Leaves with 5-8 leaflets, hairless to sparsely hairy on top.
12. Nashville breadroot
1
Wild sarsaparilla
2
1
Aralia nudicaulis , Araliaceae (Ginseng family)
QUICK CHECK Single compound leaf with 3 main pinnate branches; flowering umbel
on long, naked stem, separate from leaves. ID difficulty 2,
DESCRIPTION: twice or Perennial forming large, well-spaced colonies by rhizome. Leaves
attach Leaflets typically 3-7 (most often 5) leaflets. The rachis is dark purple where divisions,
each with occasionally thrice compound, 12-20" (30-50 long with three primary single,
mostly sessile, some (especially terminal ones) stalked or half-sessile, leaflets
290
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES COMPOSHED GROUP 20 BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND, FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS physical form is largely an adaptation with a variety to full sun. of edible Group parts, 20 contains but plants 8 This of the from 12 produce five different root carrot vegetables. families family The (Apiaceae) hardest members. species to of identify Despite these the here reputation are plants of 3-6, this the family for difficulty when in and bloom danger, or fruit-the none tricky resembles any dangerous the various species edibles from resemble each other. these (The Apiaceae very part is differentiating hemlock (p. 671) can functional young rosettes when not of in poison bloom.) Note that plants 3-6 do in not books have are highly common names in helpful. There are two different genera biscuitroot, plants English-the names you see with variable and usually not and Cymopterus) that I am calling Also, plant reflecting is included here despite normally having a stem, because that soft edible the roots fact (Lomatium that foragers tend to think of them together. the stem is so short #6 most people will not notice it. TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 20 The key is not your final answer! Leaves single, more than 12" (30 cm) long, widely spaced, 2 or 3 times compound with distinct 1. Wild sarsaparilla ovate or obovate leaflets. or Leaves single, less than 1" (2.5 cm) long, closely spaced along a rhizome, carpet-forming, ternately 2. White clover compound, with tiny teeth and chevron markings. or Leaves in rosettes or clumps. Leaves multi-compound and lacy with indistinct divisions. Flowers yellow; fruit ribbed or ridged but not broadly winged. 3. Yellow prairie biscuitroot Lobe tips rounded or abruptly pointed, petiole not channeled. 4. Thread-leaf musineon or Lobes thread-like with sharp tips; petiole broadly channeled. or Flowers white; fruit prominently winged. 5. Small winged biscuitroot Leaves shiny. Leaves dull grayish. 6. Large winged biscuitroot Leaves once pinnately compound with toothed leaflets of 2 distinct alternating sizes. 7. Silverweed or Leaves ternately compound. Leaflets elliptic or obovate, sharply toothed with depressed veins. Fruit heart-shaped with the seeds in a pitted surface. 8. Common strawberry or or Fruit pointed with the seeds in a non-pitted surface. 9. Woodland strawberry Leaflets entire, creased and shaped like a paper heart. 10. Violet wood sorrel Leaves palmately compound with 3-8 leaflets. Leaves with 3-5 leaflets, densely halry on top. 11. Small prairie-turnip Leaves with 5-8 leaflets, hairless to sparsely hairy on top. 12. Nashville breadroot 1 Wild sarsaparilla 2 1 Aralia nudicaulis , Araliaceae (Ginseng family) QUICK CHECK Single compound leaf with 3 main pinnate branches; flowering umbel on long, naked stem, separate from leaves. ID difficulty 2, DESCRIPTION: twice or Perennial forming large, well-spaced colonies by rhizome. Leaves attach Leaflets typically 3-7 (most often 5) leaflets. The rachis is dark purple where divisions, each with occasionally thrice compound, 12-20" (30-50 long with three primary single, mostly sessile, some (especially terminal ones) stalked or half-sessile, leaflets 290 