(Bean
family)
STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND
3-8"
(8-20
cm)
long,
resting
on
the
difficulty
in 1 appearance. ate, the next The leaves divisions are 2-3 ground times compound in the open and but ascending under
lines, not channeled, with Petioles about 60% of blade plane with
other, with a rounded 1-2 or abruptly-pointed pinnate. Ultimate tip. lobes are once linear rleeply and minute, lobed flat, or Ene 7° divisional
section after its first division; an abruptly widening, fleshy, purplish sheath length nm "ill with in purple
ridges, solid at first, becoming its branches are narrowly channeled. Scapes at the base. Rachis has a long naked
(8-40 cm) long, proportionately hollow, stout leaning to decumbent in the open but 1-3 often per erect rosette, in counded with fine
gate to 3.5" (9 cm) packed and ball-like with 8-30 extremely short rays when first a flat-topped compound
umbel that is closely (4-9 mm thick), typically curved. Inflorescence competition. 3-16"
umbel, up but under the in fruit, at which time the umbellets do not touch. There flowering; bracts the rays elon-
in a lopsided whorl. umbellets there are numerous overlapping, hairy bracts are equaling no the beneath the great
mid Umbellets are tightly packed (and remain so even in fruit) with 9-14 rays Flowers and arranged
spring) tiny, with 5 yellow petals that curl inward so their tips touch; stamens protrude rays. by about the (early length to
of the flower. Fruits 6-7 mm long, flattened, ovate to oblong, light brown with
prominent reddish-brown tubes.
HABITAT: Prairies, savannahs, roadsides, lightly used pastures-espec.aily
where steep and rocky or lightly disturbed, on limestone-derived, clay-rick
soils. Native.
&
FOOD USE: The roots are sweet with a slightly aromatic aftertaste. and have
a nice texture. You can eat them raw but they are better cooked. Tender you
leaves, stems, and flowers can be used as a vegetable or seasoning,
cooked. These are only available in spring or early summer. Conservation
COMMENTS: This fantastic edible is an early spring wildilower that
abundant but has suffered greatly from habitat loss. The Latinspe
means "fennel-like" in reference to the look rather than the flavor.
does not taste like parsley-the flavor is very strong. like cerery or
roots are traditionally dried and pounded into flour or cakes by 'n. -
people. AKA prairie parsley.
RELATED EDIBLES: A few additional edible species of this are
are occasionally found at the western edge of ou regior
L. macrorhizus and L. cous. Also see white prairie biscuitroo: (p.468).
Apiaceae (Carrot tamily
(Bean family) STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND 3-8" (8-20 cm) long, resting on the difficulty in 1 appearance. ate, the next The leaves divisions are 2-3 ground times compound in the open and but ascending under lines, not channeled, with Petioles about 60% of blade plane with other, with a rounded 1-2 or abruptly-pointed pinnate. Ultimate tip. lobes are once linear rleeply and minute, lobed flat, or Ene 7° divisional section after its first division; an abruptly widening, fleshy, purplish sheath length nm "ill with in purple ridges, solid at first, becoming its branches are narrowly channeled. Scapes at the base. Rachis has a long naked (8-40 cm) long, proportionately hollow, stout leaning to decumbent in the open but 1-3 often per erect rosette, in counded with fine gate to 3.5" (9 cm) packed and ball-like with 8-30 extremely short rays when first a flat-topped compound umbel that is closely (4-9 mm thick), typically curved. Inflorescence competition. 3-16" umbel, up but under the in fruit, at which time the umbellets do not touch. There flowering; bracts the rays elon- in a lopsided whorl. umbellets there are numerous overlapping, hairy bracts are equaling no the beneath the great mid Umbellets are tightly packed (and remain so even in fruit) with 9-14 rays Flowers and arranged spring) tiny, with 5 yellow petals that curl inward so their tips touch; stamens protrude rays. by about the (early length to of the flower. Fruits 6-7 mm long, flattened, ovate to oblong, light brown with prominent reddish-brown tubes. HABITAT: Prairies, savannahs, roadsides, lightly used pastures-espec.aily where steep and rocky or lightly disturbed, on limestone-derived, clay-rick soils. Native. & FOOD USE: The roots are sweet with a slightly aromatic aftertaste. and have a nice texture. You can eat them raw but they are better cooked. Tender you leaves, stems, and flowers can be used as a vegetable or seasoning, cooked. These are only available in spring or early summer. Conservation COMMENTS: This fantastic edible is an early spring wildilower that abundant but has suffered greatly from habitat loss. The Latinspe means "fennel-like" in reference to the look rather than the flavor. does not taste like parsley-the flavor is very strong. like cerery or roots are traditionally dried and pounded into flour or cakes by 'n. - people. AKA prairie parsley. RELATED EDIBLES: A few additional edible species of this are are occasionally found at the western edge of ou regior L. macrorhizus and L. cous. Also see white prairie biscuitroo: (p.468). Apiaceae (Carrot tamily 