FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS,
2
White clover repens Fabaceae 1 (Bean family)
Trifolium Ground-cover with three part compound difficulty leaves on 1. long, erect petioles,
QUICK leaflets CHECK all sessile, This bearing is the common chevrons; clover flowers of lawns, white. (2-5 with cm). ID perennial Both petioles stems and tall-but creeping pedicels along much are
the DESCRIPTION: ground on the and side rooting of the at stem, the nodes then every turn thin, to 0,8~2" rise broadly erect, and up shallowly to 28" (70 channeled, cm) the often tips curvy. blunt
with
a
small
notch,
Leaves borne shorter where ternately with mowed. a compound. light Petioles chevron. Leaflets long Midvein and sessile, slightly broadly depressed; overlook elliptic them secondary to obovate, and call veins the margin tiny, numerous, entire). to erect Inflorescence and flowers straight. (the a
the Margins surface have tiny needle-teeth (so small you might round bundle of tiny, ascending single flower).
whole one tight, The groove peduncle cluster is much is often very deeper mistakenly strongly than ridged-and white the considered others. but sometimes not Flowers a symmetrically; irregular, pinkish,
especially narrowly toward the bottom of the cluster. Fruit a tiny
pea-like, generally pod.
HABITAT: Open, sunny, disturbed ground with short vegeta-
tion, mostly lawns and roadsides. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Tender young leaves can be nibbled anytime,
but are best in spring. The flowers are a sweet snack and can
be used for garnish, salads, or in cooked vegetable dishes.
They can also be used fresh or dried for tea.
COMMENTS: I wonder what would have happened if I had
found a four-leaf clover while writing this description.
RELATED EDIBLE: Strawberry clover T. fragiferum is a creep-
ing plant nearly identical to white clover, but its flowers are
mostly pink and its leaves lack chevrons.
3 Yellow prairie biscuitroot
3
3
3
Lomatium foeniculaceum Apiaceae (Carrot family)
QUICK CHECK: Low herb with multi-compound leaves that have tiny, lacy divisions; naked
stalk with a compound umbel, the umbellets yellow and tightly packed. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Taproots vertical, unbranched, thickest in the middle or toward
the end, the larger ones to 0.9" (23 mm) wide, abruptly narrowed near the top. Some plants
develop multi- headed crowns. The enlarged portion is 5-8" (13-20 cm) long. The root is
brown outside with a thick, 2-layer waxy skin, smoothish but broken by scattered shallow
fissures and a few raised bumps; lacks encircling constrictions. Flesh white, starchy, scarcely fibrous, with a
non-woody, cream colored core. The root does not reach the surface; there is a short underground stem layered
with many encircling
sheaths. This species
is usually covered with
fine, soft, curly hair-
but southern popula-
tions may be hairless
or nearly so, and these
have sometimes been
recognized as a sepa-
rate species, L. dauci-
folium. Basal leaves in
a rosette of 4-8, each
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, 2 White clover repens Fabaceae 1 (Bean family) Trifolium Ground-cover with three part compound difficulty leaves on 1. long, erect petioles, QUICK leaflets CHECK all sessile, This bearing is the common chevrons; clover flowers of lawns, white. (2-5 with cm). ID perennial Both petioles stems and tall-but creeping pedicels along much are the DESCRIPTION: ground on the and side rooting of the at stem, the nodes then every turn thin, to 0,8~2" rise broadly erect, and up shallowly to 28" (70 channeled, cm) the often tips curvy. blunt with a small notch, Leaves borne shorter where ternately with mowed. a compound. light Petioles chevron. Leaflets long Midvein and sessile, slightly broadly depressed; overlook elliptic them secondary to obovate, and call veins the margin tiny, numerous, entire). to erect Inflorescence and flowers straight. (the a the Margins surface have tiny needle-teeth (so small you might round bundle of tiny, ascending single flower). whole one tight, The groove peduncle cluster is much is often very deeper mistakenly strongly than ridged-and white the considered others. but sometimes not Flowers a symmetrically; irregular, pinkish, especially narrowly toward the bottom of the cluster. Fruit a tiny pea-like, generally pod. HABITAT: Open, sunny, disturbed ground with short vegeta- tion, mostly lawns and roadsides. Introduced. FOOD USE: Tender young leaves can be nibbled anytime, but are best in spring. The flowers are a sweet snack and can be used for garnish, salads, or in cooked vegetable dishes. They can also be used fresh or dried for tea. COMMENTS: I wonder what would have happened if I had found a four-leaf clover while writing this description. RELATED EDIBLE: Strawberry clover T. fragiferum is a creep- ing plant nearly identical to white clover, but its flowers are mostly pink and its leaves lack chevrons. 3 Yellow prairie biscuitroot 3 3 3 Lomatium foeniculaceum Apiaceae (Carrot family) QUICK CHECK: Low herb with multi-compound leaves that have tiny, lacy divisions; naked stalk with a compound umbel, the umbellets yellow and tightly packed. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Taproots vertical, unbranched, thickest in the middle or toward the end, the larger ones to 0.9" (23 mm) wide, abruptly narrowed near the top. Some plants develop multi- headed crowns. The enlarged portion is 5-8" (13-20 cm) long. The root is brown outside with a thick, 2-layer waxy skin, smoothish but broken by scattered shallow fissures and a few raised bumps; lacks encircling constrictions. Flesh white, starchy, scarcely fibrous, with a non-woody, cream colored core. The root does not reach the surface; there is a short underground stem layered with many encircling sheaths. This species is usually covered with fine, soft, curly hair- but southern popula- tions may be hairless or nearly so, and these have sometimes been recognized as a sepa- rate species, L. dauci- folium. Basal leaves in a rosette of 4-8, each 