FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND
4
Musineon tenuifolium Apiaceae (Carrot family)
Thread-leaf musineon
Small plant with tufted, erect stems and lacy leaves ID difficulty and tiny, 1. bright
yellow spring ephemeral growing in dense clumps fibrous from a multi- with a
QUICK 5-petaled CHECK: flowers in compound umbels above the leaves,
DESCRIPTION: Perennial All parts are hairless. Taproot long, narrow, tapered, compound
woody core. Leaves all basal, with erect, the ultimate divisions very narrow, about 1 mm wide linear, sheath with needle- at the
headed root crown. in rosettes, to 9" (23 cm) high, 2-3 times and
or divided, finely dissected mm thick, erect, broadly V-channeled, with a wide but inrolled papery 7-12" (18-30 cm) tali
like tips. Petioles dead 1.5-2.5 petiole bases persist attached to the crown from earlier years. Scape leaves, sometimes hairy
base. Many mm thick, rounded, faintly ridged, scarcely tapered, rising slightly above the umbel to 1.2" (3 cm)
and 3-5 below the umbel but otherwise usually hairless. Inflorescence a small compound bracts under the
just usually lacking bracts under the great umbel, but with a whorl of 5-10 linear, pointed in
umbellet across, usually surpassing the flowers. Flowers yellow, tiny, the 5 petals curled in strongly, touching the
center. Fruit 2-4 mm long, egg-shaped to oblong and flattened, prominently ribbed.
HABITAT: Dry, rocky, sunny hillsides. Native.
FOOD USE: Leaves can be chopped and used as a seasoning. Roots have a carroty flavor and can be eaten
cooked but are rather small and tough. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: This delicate member of the carrot family often makes incredible displays on rocky prairie
hillsides in spring. Foodwise it is the least useful of our small carrot-family prairie plants with edible roots.
This species appears to hybridize with M. divaricatum (p. 467) in some areas, resulting in lacy-leaved plants
with erect, forked, leafy stems.
294
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND 4 Musineon tenuifolium Apiaceae (Carrot family) Thread-leaf musineon Small plant with tufted, erect stems and lacy leaves ID difficulty and tiny, 1. bright yellow spring ephemeral growing in dense clumps fibrous from a multi- with a QUICK 5-petaled CHECK: flowers in compound umbels above the leaves, DESCRIPTION: Perennial All parts are hairless. Taproot long, narrow, tapered, compound woody core. Leaves all basal, with erect, the ultimate divisions very narrow, about 1 mm wide linear, sheath with needle- at the headed root crown. in rosettes, to 9" (23 cm) high, 2-3 times and or divided, finely dissected mm thick, erect, broadly V-channeled, with a wide but inrolled papery 7-12" (18-30 cm) tali like tips. Petioles dead 1.5-2.5 petiole bases persist attached to the crown from earlier years. Scape leaves, sometimes hairy base. Many mm thick, rounded, faintly ridged, scarcely tapered, rising slightly above the umbel to 1.2" (3 cm) and 3-5 below the umbel but otherwise usually hairless. Inflorescence a small compound bracts under the just usually lacking bracts under the great umbel, but with a whorl of 5-10 linear, pointed in umbellet across, usually surpassing the flowers. Flowers yellow, tiny, the 5 petals curled in strongly, touching the center. Fruit 2-4 mm long, egg-shaped to oblong and flattened, prominently ribbed. HABITAT: Dry, rocky, sunny hillsides. Native. FOOD USE: Leaves can be chopped and used as a seasoning. Roots have a carroty flavor and can be eaten cooked but are rather small and tough. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: This delicate member of the carrot family often makes incredible displays on rocky prairie hillsides in spring. Foodwise it is the least useful of our small carrot-family prairie plants with edible roots. This species appears to hybridize with M. divaricatum (p. 467) in some areas, resulting in lacy-leaved plants with erect, forked, leafy stems. 294 