winged biscuitroot
QUICK
Cymopterus CHECK: Small, shiny, acaulis Apiaceae (Carrot 2 2
DESCRIPTION: stem spound rises about umbel 1" Low of (2.5 white perennial cm) flowers carrot-like from and a broadly-winged taproot rosette with a fruits scape he ID aring difficulty family) a lightly nacked
yellow-orange peeling. the surface 6-9" (15-23
the or more exterior scapes. skin after Taproot thick but thin, tender, to tapering, the brownish, surface, to 0.6" where (15 that it mm) produces does thick not and a reach rosette the of surface, leaves 2, and a short one
pound, with each division again Leaves pinnately several overlapping, compound in a rosette, the or lobes the divided. of the blades flesh The 1.2-2" beneath divisions (3-5 often cm) mm) are long, tinted widely long, or nately once
blade as high length, Major roughly veins triangular, depressed below, not tips. above. Surfaces Petioles glossy. 20 hairless
nearly flat. blunt with light spaced and rarely
maroon as lines. the Inflorescence leaves, 1-3" (2.5-8 a shallowly cm) long, channeled. and may be Scape rises
is packed compound umbel twisted
The primary so rays tightly lack that it forms one ball-like mass to 1.6' of (4cm) flowers
tiny green unequal with sharp, whitish tip and a dark central at the
with a bracts on the outer side very only, reduced); connected umbelless
lanceolate bracts (or the bracts and leurs
5 white petals, their tips in-curled; anthers vein. are Flowers white
Fruits flat
3 mm long
conspicuon:
all sides.
plish, beco
and some: ne,
with age.
about 1mm.
HABITAT: Dry
ries. especially where
rocky or sandv. often
on hillsides. Native.
FOOD USE: Roots
can be eaten cocked
or dried and ground
into flour. Young
leaves can be used
as an herb in spring.
Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: The
roots are good tast-
ing but small; the
leaves have a pleasant
lemon-par sley flavor.
This tiny plant is easy
to overlook, but once
you look closely, it is
hard to forget. The
truits are amazing
under magnific ation
as are the shimmery
leaves. AKA Cymop
terus glomeratus. plains
spring parsiey.
295
winged biscuitroot QUICK Cymopterus CHECK: Small, shiny, acaulis Apiaceae (Carrot 2 2 DESCRIPTION: stem spound rises about umbel 1" Low of (2.5 white perennial cm) flowers carrot-like from and a broadly-winged taproot rosette with a fruits scape he ID aring difficulty family) a lightly nacked yellow-orange peeling. the surface 6-9" (15-23 the or more exterior scapes. skin after Taproot thick but thin, tender, to tapering, the brownish, surface, to 0.6" where (15 that it mm) produces does thick not and a reach rosette the of surface, leaves 2, and a short one pound, with each division again Leaves pinnately several overlapping, compound in a rosette, the or lobes the divided. of the blades flesh The 1.2-2" beneath divisions (3-5 often cm) mm) are long, tinted widely long, or nately once blade as high length, Major roughly veins triangular, depressed below, not tips. above. Surfaces Petioles glossy. 20 hairless nearly flat. blunt with light spaced and rarely maroon as lines. the Inflorescence leaves, 1-3" (2.5-8 a shallowly cm) long, channeled. and may be Scape rises is packed compound umbel twisted The primary so rays tightly lack that it forms one ball-like mass to 1.6' of (4cm) flowers tiny green unequal with sharp, whitish tip and a dark central at the with a bracts on the outer side very only, reduced); connected umbelless lanceolate bracts (or the bracts and leurs 5 white petals, their tips in-curled; anthers vein. are Flowers white Fruits flat 3 mm long conspicuon: all sides. plish, beco and some: ne, with age. about 1mm. HABITAT: Dry ries. especially where rocky or sandv. often on hillsides. Native. FOOD USE: Roots can be eaten cocked or dried and ground into flour. Young leaves can be used as an herb in spring. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: The roots are good tast- ing but small; the leaves have a pleasant lemon-par sley flavor. This tiny plant is easy to overlook, but once you look closely, it is hard to forget. The truits are amazing under magnific ation as are the shimmery leaves. AKA Cymop terus glomeratus. plains spring parsiey. 295 