FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND
6 winged biscuitroot
3
Cymopterus Large montanus Apiaceae (Carrot family)
rosette of lacy grayish leaves with twisted difficulty divi- 2.
QUICK CHECK: short Small flowering ground-hugging stalk with dull flowers and winged fruits. ID to 8"
sions and a very spring ephemeral, low and ground-hugging. brown, Taproot bumpy,
DESCRIPTION: Perennial cm) thick, widest near the middle, the skin light terminates below
and rough, the underground stems 1.5-3" (4-8 long, whitish, and solid, branches. tough,
(20 cm) long and flesh 1.5" white (4 and soft, very tender and easily broken. It that are smooth,
ground. where toward it produces the soil 1-4 surface where they form a crown that bears Basal the basal leaves leaves in a pair, 3-5" long,
and widening that most people will see the leaves as basal.) upturned, blunt,
(The branches are so compound, short the ultimate divisions deeply lobed, the lobes numerous, Petioles of basal
2-3 times pinnately extremely crowded and overlapping. Surfaces whitish-gray but not visibly hairy. the rachis is also
mucronate, broad and flat with thin edges, channeled slightly if at all, 120% of the blade length; that
leave Stems are few to several (if present), extremely short, spreading, to 1 cm long. (This is not a typo-they are than
short!) flat. Stem leaves very crowded and usually paired (but may appear basal); their petioles are narrower
those of basal leaves and broadly U-channeled. Inflorescence compound umbel to 1.4" (3.5 cm) across with
up to 8 primary rays, some without bracts, others with a few ovate to linear bracts of variable size. Scapes (or
peduncles) 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long and 3 mm thick, fleshy with a pinhole center, the surface finely ridged and
having longer, stiffer hairs than other parts. Umbellets well-spaced. not touching even early in bloom-but the
flowers and fruit within the umbellet are always tightly packed on very short pedicels. Beneath the umbellet is a
ring of several broad, overlapping bracts, green in the central third with a darker green central nerve, the outer parts
white and papery and often broken. Flowers tiny, white, often pink tinted. with 5 crowded, nearly uncountable
petals. Fruit egg-shaped with prominent wings on all sides. turning purple with age.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Cymopterus
acaulis (previous) and Lomatium orien-
tale (p. 468) are both similar (but also
edible). Look for the dull gray leaves
and flat basal petioles on Cymopterus
montanus.
HABITAT: Dry shortgrass prairies or
semi-arid brushlands in full sun, some-
times with mixed junipers or pines.
Usually not on pure sand or clay. It can
thrive with disturbance such as mow-
ing, and is therefore often most abun-
dant on road shoulders. Native.
FOOD USE: Roots are large,
starchy, and mild-good raw, hearty
and excellent cooked. They can be
baked or dried or made into flour.
The leaves don't taste very good.
Conservation 3/1.
COMMENTS: The root of this plant is
shockingly large in relation to the size
of the above-ground portion. Similar
to prairie-turnip, it is one of the best
root vegetables of its plant communi-
1y and can be eaten heartily in a pinch
without cooking
RELATED EDIBLES: The very similar
Cymopterus mar rorhizus grows in Texas
and Oklahoma, I have not yet eaten it
296
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND 6 winged biscuitroot 3 Cymopterus Large montanus Apiaceae (Carrot family) rosette of lacy grayish leaves with twisted difficulty divi- 2. QUICK CHECK: short Small flowering ground-hugging stalk with dull flowers and winged fruits. ID to 8" sions and a very spring ephemeral, low and ground-hugging. brown, Taproot bumpy, DESCRIPTION: Perennial cm) thick, widest near the middle, the skin light terminates below and rough, the underground stems 1.5-3" (4-8 long, whitish, and solid, branches. tough, (20 cm) long and flesh 1.5" white (4 and soft, very tender and easily broken. It that are smooth, ground. where toward it produces the soil 1-4 surface where they form a crown that bears Basal the basal leaves leaves in a pair, 3-5" long, and widening that most people will see the leaves as basal.) upturned, blunt, (The branches are so compound, short the ultimate divisions deeply lobed, the lobes numerous, Petioles of basal 2-3 times pinnately extremely crowded and overlapping. Surfaces whitish-gray but not visibly hairy. the rachis is also mucronate, broad and flat with thin edges, channeled slightly if at all, 120% of the blade length; that leave Stems are few to several (if present), extremely short, spreading, to 1 cm long. (This is not a typo-they are than short!) flat. Stem leaves very crowded and usually paired (but may appear basal); their petioles are narrower those of basal leaves and broadly U-channeled. Inflorescence compound umbel to 1.4" (3.5 cm) across with up to 8 primary rays, some without bracts, others with a few ovate to linear bracts of variable size. Scapes (or peduncles) 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long and 3 mm thick, fleshy with a pinhole center, the surface finely ridged and having longer, stiffer hairs than other parts. Umbellets well-spaced. not touching even early in bloom-but the flowers and fruit within the umbellet are always tightly packed on very short pedicels. Beneath the umbellet is a ring of several broad, overlapping bracts, green in the central third with a darker green central nerve, the outer parts white and papery and often broken. Flowers tiny, white, often pink tinted. with 5 crowded, nearly uncountable petals. Fruit egg-shaped with prominent wings on all sides. turning purple with age. CONFUSING PLANTS: Cymopterus acaulis (previous) and Lomatium orien- tale (p. 468) are both similar (but also edible). Look for the dull gray leaves and flat basal petioles on Cymopterus montanus. HABITAT: Dry shortgrass prairies or semi-arid brushlands in full sun, some- times with mixed junipers or pines. Usually not on pure sand or clay. It can thrive with disturbance such as mow- ing, and is therefore often most abun- dant on road shoulders. Native. FOOD USE: Roots are large, starchy, and mild-good raw, hearty and excellent cooked. They can be baked or dried or made into flour. The leaves don't taste very good. Conservation 3/1. COMMENTS: The root of this plant is shockingly large in relation to the size of the above-ground portion. Similar to prairie-turnip, it is one of the best root vegetables of its plant communi- 1y and can be eaten heartily in a pinch without cooking RELATED EDIBLES: The very similar Cymopterus mar rorhizus grows in Texas and Oklahoma, I have not yet eaten it 296 