LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND
7 Silverweed 177748 2
Potentilla anserina Rosaceae (Rose family)
leaves QUICK with CHECK: silver Low shoreland plant spreading by runners; hutted
undersides; 5-petaled yellow flowers on leafless storas pinuate] ID difficulty
DESCRIPTION: runners (stolons) Perennial spreading by rhizomes and thin, wiry, reddish, 1.
thin, thick, resembling the those of strawberry (a relative). Rhizomes hairy surface e
to 4-7 22" mm surface smooth and light brown. Leaves in tufts of several, fleshy, long and
up (56 cm) tall where the plants are crowded and robust, 3-7" (8-18 cm) erect and
prostrate almost or slightly to ascending where leaf clumps are sparse, pinnately compound. long and
leafy the base. Leaflets increase in size toward the leaf tip; miniature leaflets Rachis/petiole are located ch anneled.
typical leaflets. Leaflet blades sessile, up to 2" (5 cm) long, elliptic to oblanceolate with between the
(Miniature leaflets may be entire). Surfaces: the upper dark green, glossy and hairless prominent, or slightly sharo hairy, teeth. the
lower covered with dense, fine, silvery wool, making the leaflets distinctly bicolored. Secondary veins straight.
literally parallel, and deeply depressed. Stolons, leaf rachises, and flower pedicels are all softly hairy. Flow-
ers about 0.7" (18 mm) across, bright yellow, with 5 separate petals, borne singly on a long, slender pedicel
from the stolon. Fruits in a cluster surrounded by bracts-appearing like a dry, reddish to brown strawberry
composed of spherical fruitlets.
HABITAT: Shores of large bodies of water, primarily the Ocean and Great Lakes. Occasionally found
in open, disturbed soil such as road shoulders and gravel pits. It needs full sun and will form large
on sand, rock, or gravel, but grows larger and better in rich, soft mud. Native.
FOOD USE: Dig rhizomes from fall through spring. Wash, then eat them boiled, steamed, or roaster.
for large, lush plants on mudflats; the tiny, crooked rhizomes of stunted plants on grave! shores are
dig, and hardly worth eating if you dig them. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: For a perennial, silverweed varies enormously in its robustness. It is more commonly large
and lush in the Pacific Northwest, as well as in northern Europe, both places where it was traditionally used
as food. The rhizomes are tender and sweet but also astringent. A coastal form found in our region along the
Atlantic coast from Labrador south to Long Island is sometimes considered a separate species. P. pacifica
Some botanists place silverweeds in their own genus, Anserina.
LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND 7 Silverweed 177748 2 Potentilla anserina Rosaceae (Rose family) leaves QUICK with CHECK: silver Low shoreland plant spreading by runners; hutted undersides; 5-petaled yellow flowers on leafless storas pinuate] ID difficulty DESCRIPTION: runners (stolons) Perennial spreading by rhizomes and thin, wiry, reddish, 1. thin, thick, resembling the those of strawberry (a relative). Rhizomes hairy surface e to 4-7 22" mm surface smooth and light brown. Leaves in tufts of several, fleshy, long and up (56 cm) tall where the plants are crowded and robust, 3-7" (8-18 cm) erect and prostrate almost or slightly to ascending where leaf clumps are sparse, pinnately compound. long and leafy the base. Leaflets increase in size toward the leaf tip; miniature leaflets Rachis/petiole are located ch anneled. typical leaflets. Leaflet blades sessile, up to 2" (5 cm) long, elliptic to oblanceolate with between the (Miniature leaflets may be entire). Surfaces: the upper dark green, glossy and hairless prominent, or slightly sharo hairy, teeth. the lower covered with dense, fine, silvery wool, making the leaflets distinctly bicolored. Secondary veins straight. literally parallel, and deeply depressed. Stolons, leaf rachises, and flower pedicels are all softly hairy. Flow- ers about 0.7" (18 mm) across, bright yellow, with 5 separate petals, borne singly on a long, slender pedicel from the stolon. Fruits in a cluster surrounded by bracts-appearing like a dry, reddish to brown strawberry composed of spherical fruitlets. HABITAT: Shores of large bodies of water, primarily the Ocean and Great Lakes. Occasionally found in open, disturbed soil such as road shoulders and gravel pits. It needs full sun and will form large on sand, rock, or gravel, but grows larger and better in rich, soft mud. Native. FOOD USE: Dig rhizomes from fall through spring. Wash, then eat them boiled, steamed, or roaster. for large, lush plants on mudflats; the tiny, crooked rhizomes of stunted plants on grave! shores are dig, and hardly worth eating if you dig them. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: For a perennial, silverweed varies enormously in its robustness. It is more commonly large and lush in the Pacific Northwest, as well as in northern Europe, both places where it was traditionally used as food. The rhizomes are tender and sweet but also astringent. A coastal form found in our region along the Atlantic coast from Labrador south to Long Island is sometimes considered a separate species. P. pacifica Some botanists place silverweeds in their own genus, Anserina. 