FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND
NG-286
genus STRAWBERRY Fragaria Rosaceae (Rose family)
CHECK: Three hair toothed leaflets and a miniature strawberry. ID difficulty 2.
QUICK herbs spreading by stolons. Leaves basal, ternately compound. finely Leaflets hairy almost both
DESCRIPTION: Low perennial long, the blades elliptic to obovate, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, 45°, running straight on
sides. for most of their length, then usually forking shortly before margins. covered with long,
sessile, Midvein on petiolules and secondary 1-3 mm veins strongly depressed above; secondary veins the about Margins evenly
and literally with parallel sharp teeth. Petioles straight, thin, solid, with a faint channel, evenly of umbel-like
serrated At large, the base are reddish, triangular stipules with bristle tips. Inflorescence 3-11, bracts beneath or
erect hairs. into more umbel-like clusters, the scape with long hairs, and hairy bristle-toothed
the forking junctures. 2 or Flowers 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) across with 5 broad, blunt, separate white petals, usually not
overlapping, narrowed at the base. In the center is a yellow mound from which numerous stamens radiate.
There are usually 10 lanceolate, sharp-tipped, occasionally lobed, green, hairy sepals. Fruit like a cultivated
strawberry in miniature-a red fleshy structure, narrowed at the base, the surface holding numerous scat-
tered seeds (achenes).
CONFUSING PLANTS: Certain cinquefoils, especially Potentilla norvegica, are often confused with wild
strawberry, but their fruits are not similar. Barren strawberry Waldsteinia fragarioides is another relative
with dry, inedible fruit. The bland but edible false strawberry (p. 434) is so similar that it has fooled millions.
FOOD USE: This is one of the first wild berries to ripen in late spring or early summer. While tedious to gather,
they are astoundingly delicious. All strawberry recipes are immensely better when made with wild fruit. The
leaves can be used for a moderately astringent tea. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Technically, the fleshy part is the receptacle, and the seeds on its surface are the actual fruits.
i'm warning you so you are ready for the next techno-botanical correctobot you encounter.
8 Common wild strawberry Fragaria virginiana
ISS
3
This species has its seeds
embedded in pits in the heart-
shaped fruit's surface. It likes full
sun and moist but well-drained
fields and roadsides, often thriv-
ing in very poor soil. Native.
9
Woodland
strawberry
Fragaria
vesca
3
The woodland strawberry has more
pointed fruit, with the seeds not in
pits; il is less intensely flavored. This
species is characteristic of wood-
lands, especially young, open forests
298
and forest edges. Native.
FLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND NG-286 genus STRAWBERRY Fragaria Rosaceae (Rose family) CHECK: Three hair toothed leaflets and a miniature strawberry. ID difficulty 2. QUICK herbs spreading by stolons. Leaves basal, ternately compound. finely Leaflets hairy almost both DESCRIPTION: Low perennial long, the blades elliptic to obovate, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, 45°, running straight on sides. for most of their length, then usually forking shortly before margins. covered with long, sessile, Midvein on petiolules and secondary 1-3 mm veins strongly depressed above; secondary veins the about Margins evenly and literally with parallel sharp teeth. Petioles straight, thin, solid, with a faint channel, evenly of umbel-like serrated At large, the base are reddish, triangular stipules with bristle tips. Inflorescence 3-11, bracts beneath or erect hairs. into more umbel-like clusters, the scape with long hairs, and hairy bristle-toothed the forking junctures. 2 or Flowers 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) across with 5 broad, blunt, separate white petals, usually not overlapping, narrowed at the base. In the center is a yellow mound from which numerous stamens radiate. There are usually 10 lanceolate, sharp-tipped, occasionally lobed, green, hairy sepals. Fruit like a cultivated strawberry in miniature-a red fleshy structure, narrowed at the base, the surface holding numerous scat- tered seeds (achenes). CONFUSING PLANTS: Certain cinquefoils, especially Potentilla norvegica, are often confused with wild strawberry, but their fruits are not similar. Barren strawberry Waldsteinia fragarioides is another relative with dry, inedible fruit. The bland but edible false strawberry (p. 434) is so similar that it has fooled millions. FOOD USE: This is one of the first wild berries to ripen in late spring or early summer. While tedious to gather, they are astoundingly delicious. All strawberry recipes are immensely better when made with wild fruit. The leaves can be used for a moderately astringent tea. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Technically, the fleshy part is the receptacle, and the seeds on its surface are the actual fruits. i'm warning you so you are ready for the next techno-botanical correctobot you encounter. 8 Common wild strawberry Fragaria virginiana ISS 3 This species has its seeds embedded in pits in the heart- shaped fruit's surface. It likes full sun and moist but well-drained fields and roadsides, often thriv- ing in very poor soil. Native. 9 Woodland strawberry Fragaria vesca 3 The woodland strawberry has more pointed fruit, with the seeds not in pits; il is less intensely flavored. This species is characteristic of wood- lands, especially young, open forests 298 and forest edges. Native. 