RLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND
10 Violet wood sorrel
2
Oxalis violacea family Oxalidaceae 2 3
NG
338
MICK CHECK: heart; Low, clumped plant with three part
paper purple flowers with green centers on thin leatts ID
DESCRIPTION: A perennial spring ephemeral growing from a cluster of bulblets difficulty with leafy 1.
information
sheaths on the outside, the
numerous leaves and flower-
ing stems densely clumped.
Leaves composed of three sessile, heart shaped
leaflets attached at the tip. Leaffets identical
0.4-1" (1-2.5 cm) wide, creased
like a folded paper heart. The blades
with no veins depressed or protruding
are entire. There is often an orange
of the notch. All parts of the plant are
and generally hairless, although leaves
oles are occasionally faintly hairy. Petioles
thin, round, smooth, solid, flimsy, often
1.5-5" (4-13 cm) long. Scapes erect
unbranched, extending well above
Inflorescence an umbel of 3-12 flowers
pair of small bracts at its base. Flowers
symmetrical, about 1" (2.5 cm) across
long-triangular sepals and 5 blunt, light
petals, seemingly joined and funnei-like
base Flower centers are dull green with
sunburst pattern and a whitish halo. in bud
sepal tips have an orange dot. Fruit an egg-shaped
capsule.
HABITAT: Dry, open prairies. rocky hillsides
open woods. Native. 23
FOOD USE: Bulbs are edible. with a pleasant
slightly tangy flavor. Beneath the bulb is a thick
ened taproot that is tender and delicious-bur
both of these underground parts are small All
above-ground parts are edible, tender. sour. and
delicious-but they are available only during the
spring. They are good in salads, soups or as 3
trailside nibble. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: I think this strikingly beautiful
plant is the best tasting of our many wood sorrels TO
The presence of bulbs is unusual for a dicot.
preserve the population, 1 suggest not collecting wrote of
underground parts. Laura Ingalls Wilder of
collecting and eating this plant on the prairies
Minnesota and South Dakota.
EDIBLE: Mountain wood sorrel low.
RELATED IS a stemless, hairy spacies or pink
0 montana coniterous forests. It has beautiful of spring
cool Howers somewhat like those edible Dui
and white leaves are evergreen and rough
beauty not very The attractive as rood because they are
199
montund.
RLOWERING STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND 10 Violet wood sorrel 2 Oxalis violacea family Oxalidaceae 2 3 NG 338 MICK CHECK: heart; Low, clumped plant with three part paper purple flowers with green centers on thin leatts ID DESCRIPTION: A perennial spring ephemeral growing from a cluster of bulblets difficulty with leafy 1. information sheaths on the outside, the numerous leaves and flower- ing stems densely clumped. Leaves composed of three sessile, heart shaped leaflets attached at the tip. Leaffets identical 0.4-1" (1-2.5 cm) wide, creased like a folded paper heart. The blades with no veins depressed or protruding are entire. There is often an orange of the notch. All parts of the plant are and generally hairless, although leaves oles are occasionally faintly hairy. Petioles thin, round, smooth, solid, flimsy, often 1.5-5" (4-13 cm) long. Scapes erect unbranched, extending well above Inflorescence an umbel of 3-12 flowers pair of small bracts at its base. Flowers symmetrical, about 1" (2.5 cm) across long-triangular sepals and 5 blunt, light petals, seemingly joined and funnei-like base Flower centers are dull green with sunburst pattern and a whitish halo. in bud sepal tips have an orange dot. Fruit an egg-shaped capsule. HABITAT: Dry, open prairies. rocky hillsides open woods. Native. 23 FOOD USE: Bulbs are edible. with a pleasant slightly tangy flavor. Beneath the bulb is a thick ened taproot that is tender and delicious-bur both of these underground parts are small All above-ground parts are edible, tender. sour. and delicious-but they are available only during the spring. They are good in salads, soups or as 3 trailside nibble. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: I think this strikingly beautiful plant is the best tasting of our many wood sorrels TO The presence of bulbs is unusual for a dicot. preserve the population, 1 suggest not collecting wrote of underground parts. Laura Ingalls Wilder of collecting and eating this plant on the prairies Minnesota and South Dakota. EDIBLE: Mountain wood sorrel low. RELATED IS a stemless, hairy spacies or pink 0 montana coniterous forests. It has beautiful of spring cool Howers somewhat like those edible Dui and white leaves are evergreen and rough beauty not very The attractive as rood because they are 199 montund. 