STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND
Related edible:
12 Nashville breadroot
3
Pediomelum subacaule Fabaceae (Bean family)
QUICK brilliant CHECK: purple flowers Ground-hugging plant with hairy stems and dark green, palmatery
rising above the leaves; Nashville area. ID difficulty 1.
This Leaves species have is also ground-hugging, but somewhat larger. The roots are larger and lumpy or
midvein 5-8 oblanceolate leaflets with blunt tips. There are dense, long, white hairs below, amorphous
the and margins, but few to no hairs on the upper surface. Peduncles usually multiple, decumbent especially on
ascending, to 9" (23 cm) tall, hollow, densely covered with erect hairs. Raceme 1-4" (2.5-10 cm) long. rising or
well above the leaves. Flowers with a short-lobed, dark purple calyx (the tube 3-4 times longer than the lobes)
Corolla uniformly deep purple-blue, the banner narrow and slightly recurved.
HABITAT: Well-drained sunny sites on thin soil over
limestone: roadsides, power-line cuts, cedar glades.
and field edges. It is occasionally abundant in lawas
which it turns brilliant purple in April. Native. Range
map on previous page.
FOOD USE: The root is slightiy bitter raw
tasty with a faint coconut flavor. The bitterness
easily be leached out by boiling and draining one
COMMENTS: Confined mostly to the Nashville
where it is locally abundant. This species has
much habitat to development and even more
suppression. This has the most limited distribut
any plant in this book. It desperately needs foragers
raising their voices about its value, for there are many
hundreds of square miles of potential habitat-if only
different land management choices were being made
Indeed, it has been eliminated from much public land
due to bureaucratic disinterest.
301
STEM LEAFLESS, BASAL LEAVES COMPOUND Related edible: 12 Nashville breadroot 3 Pediomelum subacaule Fabaceae (Bean family) QUICK brilliant CHECK: purple flowers Ground-hugging plant with hairy stems and dark green, palmatery rising above the leaves; Nashville area. ID difficulty 1. This Leaves species have is also ground-hugging, but somewhat larger. The roots are larger and lumpy or midvein 5-8 oblanceolate leaflets with blunt tips. There are dense, long, white hairs below, amorphous the and margins, but few to no hairs on the upper surface. Peduncles usually multiple, decumbent especially on ascending, to 9" (23 cm) tall, hollow, densely covered with erect hairs. Raceme 1-4" (2.5-10 cm) long. rising or well above the leaves. Flowers with a short-lobed, dark purple calyx (the tube 3-4 times longer than the lobes) Corolla uniformly deep purple-blue, the banner narrow and slightly recurved. HABITAT: Well-drained sunny sites on thin soil over limestone: roadsides, power-line cuts, cedar glades. and field edges. It is occasionally abundant in lawas which it turns brilliant purple in April. Native. Range map on previous page. FOOD USE: The root is slightiy bitter raw tasty with a faint coconut flavor. The bitterness easily be leached out by boiling and draining one COMMENTS: Confined mostly to the Nashville where it is locally abundant. This species has much habitat to development and even more suppression. This has the most limited distribut any plant in this book. It desperately needs foragers raising their voices about its value, for there are many hundreds of square miles of potential habitat-if only different land management choices were being made Indeed, it has been eliminated from much public land due to bureaucratic disinterest. 301 