11 Small prairie-turnip
3 Hi IWE-282
Pediomelum hypogaeum + Fabaceae (Bean family)
ground-hugging plant with hairy stems and palmately difficulty compound 2.
QUICK leaves with CHECK: 5 entire Small leaflets; dense cluster of bluish, pea-like flowers. ID
Perennial with short vertical underground stem terminating at (especially or near the
DESCRIPTION: extending a 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) above the ground. Green parts (5-10 cm)
surface-occasionally have a strong turpentine-like smell. Root enlarged, turnip-like to elliptic, thick, 2-4" narrowing
underground, at the base to a thin, tough, unbranched taproot. Leaves palmately with densely
bracts) the enlarged portion 0.7-1.3" (18-33 mm) long and 30-80% as compound,
Small prairie-
turnip in blue;
all suddenly basal or packed onto the very short stem, decumbent or reclining, layered mm)
Nashville bread-
hairy, narrowly triangular, greenish to papery stipules 9-16 mm long. Petioles 3-6" (8-15
root in purple.
long, hollow, densely covered with long, white hairs that are appressed, leaning, and
erect. Leaflets 3-5, all sessile, 0.7-1.3" (18-33 mm) long, entire, obovate, acute
at the base and blunt to rounded at the tip, indented or nipple-tipped, densely
hairy on both sides and especially the margins, the hairs very long, soft, and mostly
appressed. Midvein slightly depressed above and protruding below; other veins
not evident. Peduncles usually multiple, curved and decumbent, hollow, tough,
2.5-4.5" (6-11 long, densely covered with long, soft, erect and leaning hairs.
Inflorescence a dense, compact, spike-like raceme 1-2.5" (2.5-6 long, each
pedicel with an ovate, dark green-purple, bristle-tipped bract beneath it, almost
as long as the corolla. Flowers pea-like, 10-14 mm long, the banner broad, white
to pale blue with darker blue veins. The wings equal the banner in length, are
deeply cupped, and much darker purple. The keel is hidden, much shorter, and
dark purple-brown. The corolla fades to pale straw-yellow. Pods tiny and hidden.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Prairie-turnip (p. 652) is larger in all respects with an
erect stem; the upper surface of the leaves is hairless or nearly so. Some lupines
(genus Lupinus) look similar; confirm the hairiness, flowers, and root form.
HABITAT: Prairies and savannahs, especially where soil is sandy or otherwise
poor. This short plant does best where grazing, trampling, mowing, or poor soil
reduce the competition. Native.
FOOD USE: Roots can be dug whenever the plants are visible, then peeled and
eaten raw or cooked in many ways. They dry readily, can be ground into flour or
meal, and are very good dehydrated. Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: This plant is like a miniature, ground-hugging, dry-soil version
of its larger cousin the prairie-turnip, and the root tastes essentially identical.
300
11 Small prairie-turnip 3 Hi IWE-282 Pediomelum hypogaeum + Fabaceae (Bean family) ground-hugging plant with hairy stems and palmately difficulty compound 2. QUICK leaves with CHECK: 5 entire Small leaflets; dense cluster of bluish, pea-like flowers. ID Perennial with short vertical underground stem terminating at (especially or near the DESCRIPTION: extending a 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) above the ground. Green parts (5-10 cm) surface-occasionally have a strong turpentine-like smell. Root enlarged, turnip-like to elliptic, thick, 2-4" narrowing underground, at the base to a thin, tough, unbranched taproot. Leaves palmately with densely bracts) the enlarged portion 0.7-1.3" (18-33 mm) long and 30-80% as compound, Small prairie- turnip in blue; all suddenly basal or packed onto the very short stem, decumbent or reclining, layered mm) Nashville bread- hairy, narrowly triangular, greenish to papery stipules 9-16 mm long. Petioles 3-6" (8-15 root in purple. long, hollow, densely covered with long, white hairs that are appressed, leaning, and erect. Leaflets 3-5, all sessile, 0.7-1.3" (18-33 mm) long, entire, obovate, acute at the base and blunt to rounded at the tip, indented or nipple-tipped, densely hairy on both sides and especially the margins, the hairs very long, soft, and mostly appressed. Midvein slightly depressed above and protruding below; other veins not evident. Peduncles usually multiple, curved and decumbent, hollow, tough, 2.5-4.5" (6-11 long, densely covered with long, soft, erect and leaning hairs. Inflorescence a dense, compact, spike-like raceme 1-2.5" (2.5-6 long, each pedicel with an ovate, dark green-purple, bristle-tipped bract beneath it, almost as long as the corolla. Flowers pea-like, 10-14 mm long, the banner broad, white to pale blue with darker blue veins. The wings equal the banner in length, are deeply cupped, and much darker purple. The keel is hidden, much shorter, and dark purple-brown. The corolla fades to pale straw-yellow. Pods tiny and hidden. CONFUSING PLANTS: Prairie-turnip (p. 652) is larger in all respects with an erect stem; the upper surface of the leaves is hairless or nearly so. Some lupines (genus Lupinus) look similar; confirm the hairiness, flowers, and root form. HABITAT: Prairies and savannahs, especially where soil is sandy or otherwise poor. This short plant does best where grazing, trampling, mowing, or poor soil reduce the competition. Native. FOOD USE: Roots can be dug whenever the plants are visible, then peeled and eaten raw or cooked in many ways. They dry readily, can be ground into flour or meal, and are very good dehydrated. Conservation 3. COMMENTS: This plant is like a miniature, ground-hugging, dry-soil version of its larger cousin the prairie-turnip, and the root tastes essentially identical. 300 