nm
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED
1
Rue anemone
1
Anemonella thalictroides
Ranunculaceae (Buttercup family)
QUICK CHECK: Short plant with compound leaves, the leatlets
teeth; flowers with variable numbers of white to pink petals, in umbels ID difficulty 3.
DESCRIPTION: Delicate perennial spring ephemeral, 6-10" (15-25 cm) tall. from
system with multiple small, pointed, straw-colored tubers. Basal leaves several on long,
very thin petioles, usually ternately divided 2 times, resulting in 9 leaflets. Leaflets round
to broadly ovate in outline, very thin, hairless, pale below, often heart-shaped at the base.
usually shallowly 3-lobed at the end, the lobes rounded with an occasional blunt tooth, the lons
with a light-colored nipple. Veins essentially flat on both sides but highly visible, zigzag and
by light color above and dark color below. Stems very thin, erect, to 9" (23 cm) tall, often clumped
smooth, hairless. Stem leaves borne just below the flowers; these may be a pair of once-ore
whorl of simple leaves on thread-thin petioles about 100% of blade length. Inflorescence
6 flowers, the pedicels 0.7-1.2" (18-30 mm) long. Flowers have 5-10 petals 8-14 mm long.
white or pink, the centers with numerous yellow stamens. The fruit is a dry, single-seeded
CONFUSING PLANTS:
Enemion (Isopyrum)
plant of rich-soiled valley
tall, with more deeply
5-petaled flowers are
petals broader and more
flowers are usually single
or 3 together) from leaf ax
this plant may be toxic.
HABITAT: Hardwood fores
those with lots of oak and
FOOD USE:
system prod
tubers.
These
terrible and propeo
mildly
toxic
when.
passable atter doring
and draining- out
wouldn't eat a large
quantity
Conserva-
tion 3.
COMMENTS: This
beautiful and advit
,ldflowe:
dant
tubers
that
are
has
scarcely
good
enough
edible
Their
2
call
the
for
.11
obscurity aging literature widespread Ja
spite
then
10
itesta
availability ne medioc
(ity AKA that
mulic troides
nm 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED 1 Rue anemone 1 Anemonella thalictroides Ranunculaceae (Buttercup family) QUICK CHECK: Short plant with compound leaves, the leatlets teeth; flowers with variable numbers of white to pink petals, in umbels ID difficulty 3. DESCRIPTION: Delicate perennial spring ephemeral, 6-10" (15-25 cm) tall. from system with multiple small, pointed, straw-colored tubers. Basal leaves several on long, very thin petioles, usually ternately divided 2 times, resulting in 9 leaflets. Leaflets round to broadly ovate in outline, very thin, hairless, pale below, often heart-shaped at the base. usually shallowly 3-lobed at the end, the lobes rounded with an occasional blunt tooth, the lons with a light-colored nipple. Veins essentially flat on both sides but highly visible, zigzag and by light color above and dark color below. Stems very thin, erect, to 9" (23 cm) tall, often clumped smooth, hairless. Stem leaves borne just below the flowers; these may be a pair of once-ore whorl of simple leaves on thread-thin petioles about 100% of blade length. Inflorescence 6 flowers, the pedicels 0.7-1.2" (18-30 mm) long. Flowers have 5-10 petals 8-14 mm long. white or pink, the centers with numerous yellow stamens. The fruit is a dry, single-seeded CONFUSING PLANTS: Enemion (Isopyrum) plant of rich-soiled valley tall, with more deeply 5-petaled flowers are petals broader and more flowers are usually single or 3 together) from leaf ax this plant may be toxic. HABITAT: Hardwood fores those with lots of oak and FOOD USE: system prod tubers. These terrible and propeo mildly toxic when. passable atter doring and draining- out wouldn't eat a large quantity Conserva- tion 3. COMMENTS: This beautiful and advit ,ldflowe: dant tubers that are has scarcely good enough edible Their 2 call the for .11 obscurity aging literature widespread Ja spite then 10 itesta availability ne medioc (ity AKA that mulic troides 