21
GROUP 21 BASAL LEAVES PRESENT,
STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED
contains a rather erratic assortment of species with a variety of edible as parts. "not
really Some basal, just stem leaves crammed at the base," or in one case, "not really paired, can
This group of them lose their basal leaves very early, or have leaves that might be argued just
alternate leaves crammed together." With certain colonial plants in this group you
expect to see fertile leafy stems near to but separate from infertile basal leaves. Such
plants may be hard to place in the key based upon a single flowering stem. This trouble-
some group of oddballs was the hardest to fit into this guide's organizational scheme.
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 21
The key is not your final answer!
Basal leaves attached at the bottom of or adjacent to leafy, flowering stems.
Stem leaves whorled.
Some or all leaves compound.
1. Rue anemone
or
All leaves entire.
2. Carpetweed
Stem leaves paired.
Stem leaves both paired and alternate.
Paired leaves unequal, entire; sap milky.
or
3. Common dwarf dandelle
Paired leaves not distinctly unequal, toothed; sap not milky. Scurvy-grass (p. 341).
Stem leaves all paired.
Leaves pinnately lobed, hairy: stem squared with few leaves.
or
4. Lyre-leaf sage
or
Leaves simple, toothed but not lobed.
or
Large, irregular teeth along the leaf margin.
5. Cup plant
Teeth few, mostly near leaf base.
Leaves entire.
6. Cornsalad
Leaves thick and fleshy, one pair per stalk.
Leaves not thick and fleshy, more than one pair per stalk.
7. Spring beauty
Stem erect with 2 grooves.
Stem limp and leaning or spreading, not grooved.
8. Heal-all
Blade hairless on both sides (may have hairy margin).
Blades densely soft-hairy on both sides,
9. Bladder campion
Basal Leaves leaves not attached at the bottom of leafy flowering stems; they are borne separately.
10. White campion
Leaves deeply palmately lobed and more than 8" (20 cm) across; flowers single.
compound; 4-petal flowers in a raceme.
11. Mayapple
Leaves multi-compound and fern-like.
or
Divisions elliptic, lanceolate, or lobed.
Divisions thread-like.
Leaves ternately compound.
12. Cut-leaf toothwort
Blades Blades lanceolate or oblanceolate, erratically toothed to lobed.
13. Thread-leaf toothwort
ovate and regularly toothed.
14. Slender toothwort
15. Broad-leaved tootl
302
21 GROUP 21 BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED contains a rather erratic assortment of species with a variety of edible as parts. "not really Some basal, just stem leaves crammed at the base," or in one case, "not really paired, can This group of them lose their basal leaves very early, or have leaves that might be argued just alternate leaves crammed together." With certain colonial plants in this group you expect to see fertile leafy stems near to but separate from infertile basal leaves. Such plants may be hard to place in the key based upon a single flowering stem. This trouble- some group of oddballs was the hardest to fit into this guide's organizational scheme. TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 21 The key is not your final answer! Basal leaves attached at the bottom of or adjacent to leafy, flowering stems. Stem leaves whorled. Some or all leaves compound. 1. Rue anemone or All leaves entire. 2. Carpetweed Stem leaves paired. Stem leaves both paired and alternate. Paired leaves unequal, entire; sap milky. or 3. Common dwarf dandelle Paired leaves not distinctly unequal, toothed; sap not milky. Scurvy-grass (p. 341). Stem leaves all paired. Leaves pinnately lobed, hairy: stem squared with few leaves. or 4. Lyre-leaf sage or Leaves simple, toothed but not lobed. or Large, irregular teeth along the leaf margin. 5. Cup plant Teeth few, mostly near leaf base. Leaves entire. 6. Cornsalad Leaves thick and fleshy, one pair per stalk. Leaves not thick and fleshy, more than one pair per stalk. 7. Spring beauty Stem erect with 2 grooves. Stem limp and leaning or spreading, not grooved. 8. Heal-all Blade hairless on both sides (may have hairy margin). Blades densely soft-hairy on both sides, 9. Bladder campion Basal Leaves leaves not attached at the bottom of leafy flowering stems; they are borne separately. 10. White campion Leaves deeply palmately lobed and more than 8" (20 cm) across; flowers single. compound; 4-petal flowers in a raceme. 11. Mayapple Leaves multi-compound and fern-like. or Divisions elliptic, lanceolate, or lobed. Divisions thread-like. Leaves ternately compound. 12. Cut-leaf toothwort Blades Blades lanceolate or oblanceolate, erratically toothed to lobed. 13. Thread-leaf toothwort ovate and regularly toothed. 14. Slender toothwort 15. Broad-leaved tootl 302 