LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED
3 Common dwarf dandelion
Krigia caespitosa Asteraceae (Composite 2 family)
QUICK sap and CHECK: tiny dandelion-like Hairless little flowers. plant with ID difficulty linear leaves 1. paired at forks in the stem: milky
DESCRIPTION: small radiating roots Winter annual from a root that is thickened and corm-like
commences. to entire, covered leaning, sessile, with to Sap a 18" tapered light milky. (46 bloom, underneath. cm) to Basal the tall forking. base, leaves and The 2-4 hairless, Occasionally 2-6" overwintering mm (5-15 thick, glaucous. cm) solid, the long, rosette Stems branches often long-lanceolate withers multiple slightly are in in from angled spring to the at nearly as the near base, flowering top the linear, erect with base but round above. -
center, leaves are each smaller, branch with a leaf wrapped around its lower portion. Stem whorls leaves of alternate 3-5 with and a vertical stem in the
unequal, usually slightly offset, and associated with a branch or inflorescence paired-the All paired
leaves are sessile, long-lanceolate, entire but for occasional
or rarely a lobe, strongly folded, keeled below. Midvein scarcely
slightly depressed above or in the form of a wide trough. The largest
leaves sometimes have a pair of prominent parallel secondar
the underside; otherwise the veins are obscure. Inflorescence
few heads at the end of thin, erect to occasionally spreading
to 1.6" (4 cm) long, arising from a leaf pair, the peduncie
smooth, often with a few hairs just below the head. Before
the heads are bulbous and squat. Flower heads 9-13 mm across
with only ray florets, each about twice as long as wide, cupper
fully open, the tip truncated and 5-lobed. The outside of the
single row of broad, triangular to ovate bracts. Seed ridged
with no parachute attached.
HABITAT: Full sun in moist to moderate soil where disturbed. Fleinh
roadsides, lawns, ditches. Native.
FOOD USE: The tender leaves and stems can be eaten raw or cooked
like those of dandelions, lettuce, and other relatives. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Not well known but widespread and abundant. this cute
dandeliony thing would be a lot more popular if only it were larger. because
the leaves are pretty good.
305
LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED 3 Common dwarf dandelion Krigia caespitosa Asteraceae (Composite 2 family) QUICK sap and CHECK: tiny dandelion-like Hairless little flowers. plant with ID difficulty linear leaves 1. paired at forks in the stem: milky DESCRIPTION: small radiating roots Winter annual from a root that is thickened and corm-like commences. to entire, covered leaning, sessile, with to Sap a 18" tapered light milky. (46 bloom, underneath. cm) to Basal the tall forking. base, leaves and The 2-4 hairless, Occasionally 2-6" overwintering mm (5-15 thick, glaucous. cm) solid, the long, rosette Stems branches often long-lanceolate withers multiple slightly are in in from angled spring to the at nearly as the near base, flowering top the linear, erect with base but round above. - center, leaves are each smaller, branch with a leaf wrapped around its lower portion. Stem whorls leaves of alternate 3-5 with and a vertical stem in the unequal, usually slightly offset, and associated with a branch or inflorescence paired-the All paired leaves are sessile, long-lanceolate, entire but for occasional or rarely a lobe, strongly folded, keeled below. Midvein scarcely slightly depressed above or in the form of a wide trough. The largest leaves sometimes have a pair of prominent parallel secondar the underside; otherwise the veins are obscure. Inflorescence few heads at the end of thin, erect to occasionally spreading to 1.6" (4 cm) long, arising from a leaf pair, the peduncie smooth, often with a few hairs just below the head. Before the heads are bulbous and squat. Flower heads 9-13 mm across with only ray florets, each about twice as long as wide, cupper fully open, the tip truncated and 5-lobed. The outside of the single row of broad, triangular to ovate bracts. Seed ridged with no parachute attached. HABITAT: Full sun in moist to moderate soil where disturbed. Fleinh roadsides, lawns, ditches. Native. FOOD USE: The tender leaves and stems can be eaten raw or cooked like those of dandelions, lettuce, and other relatives. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Not well known but widespread and abundant. this cute dandeliony thing would be a lot more popular if only it were larger. because the leaves are pretty good. 305 