BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR
2 Carpetweed
2
Mollugo verticillata family Molluginaceae
CHECK: small plant with thin stems creeping over the ground, forming mats;
entire QUICK leaves of unequal size in whorls of usually 6. ID difficulty 1.
Prostrate, spreading annual, usually hugging the ground, growing of from highly a
DESCRIPTION: Basal rosette of about 12 oblanceolate to spoon-shaped leaves and obtusely
whitish taproot. the largest to 1.6" (4 cm), tapering to a sessile base, the tip abruptly tender,
pointed. but not are thickened. Stems several, radiating from the crown, their bases much enlarged and of ten branch red-
unequalize, Blades light green, entire, hairless. glossy or sparkly in full sun, very
dish; succulent stems beyond the enlarged portion are about 1 mm thick, slightly angled, smooth, solid. Stems may of the
whorls; these branches also have enlarged bases. Stem leaves are in well-spaced whorls, usually 6,
leaves at of highly dissimilar size, oblanceolate, sessile, sometimes folded along the midvein, similar to the basal
leaves but narrower. Leaves hug the ground in full sun. Midvein faintly depressed above, protruding below.
Secondary veins are obscure above, but the veinlets are faintly raised. Flowers 2-5, borne on thin, straight pedicels
to 1 cm long from the center of the whorl. They are inconspicuous, tiny, with 5 ovate, cupped petals, whitish
inside and light greenish-yellow
outside, with prominent, darker
green veins.
HABITAT: Disturbed, moist
soil in full sun to moderate
shade. Yards, trails, vacant lots,
forest openings, construction
sites Often appears after wind-
storms and logging. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender leaves can
be eaten raw or cooked. They
stay succulent often well into
flowering, but are often too
small to bother with. Conser-
vation 1.
COMMENTS: This plant tastes
like raw button mushrooms,
and would be eaten more if
it were larger and didn't hug
the dirt
304
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR 2 Carpetweed 2 Mollugo verticillata family Molluginaceae CHECK: small plant with thin stems creeping over the ground, forming mats; entire QUICK leaves of unequal size in whorls of usually 6. ID difficulty 1. Prostrate, spreading annual, usually hugging the ground, growing of from highly a DESCRIPTION: Basal rosette of about 12 oblanceolate to spoon-shaped leaves and obtusely whitish taproot. the largest to 1.6" (4 cm), tapering to a sessile base, the tip abruptly tender, pointed. but not are thickened. Stems several, radiating from the crown, their bases much enlarged and of ten branch red- unequalize, Blades light green, entire, hairless. glossy or sparkly in full sun, very dish; succulent stems beyond the enlarged portion are about 1 mm thick, slightly angled, smooth, solid. Stems may of the whorls; these branches also have enlarged bases. Stem leaves are in well-spaced whorls, usually 6, leaves at of highly dissimilar size, oblanceolate, sessile, sometimes folded along the midvein, similar to the basal leaves but narrower. Leaves hug the ground in full sun. Midvein faintly depressed above, protruding below. Secondary veins are obscure above, but the veinlets are faintly raised. Flowers 2-5, borne on thin, straight pedicels to 1 cm long from the center of the whorl. They are inconspicuous, tiny, with 5 ovate, cupped petals, whitish inside and light greenish-yellow outside, with prominent, darker green veins. HABITAT: Disturbed, moist soil in full sun to moderate shade. Yards, trails, vacant lots, forest openings, construction sites Often appears after wind- storms and logging. Native. FOOD USE: Tender leaves can be eaten raw or cooked. They stay succulent often well into flowering, but are often too small to bother with. Conser- vation 1. COMMENTS: This plant tastes like raw button mushrooms, and would be eaten more if it were larger and didn't hug the dirt 304 