4
Salvia lyrata Lamiaceae (Mint family)
Lyre-leaf sage
1
rosette of hairy, pinnately-lobed leaves, difficulty often 1.
QUICK CHECK: Ground-hugging square stem and basal a raceme of irregular tubular flowers. ID 6-15 in a
with purple zones, short rhizome with fibrous roots. Basal leaves lobed with a
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from ground, a 4-8" (10-20 cm) long, deeply pinnately midvein, strongly
rosette, usually terminal hugging section, the the lobes blunt, sometimes cut fully hairy. to the Veins very deeply
ruffled, very large with no space between the depressed them. parts Both dark surfaces purple are (especially densely in winter). Margins winged. often The purple midrib with is whitish, widely
spaced, depressed broad, above, nipple-tipped with teeth. Petiole short, contrasting deeply channeled sharply with or broadly the dark blade. Stem to 26" (66 cm)
tall and 5 mm thick, usually single and erect (sometimes there
are a few small, leaning stems beside the main one), solid,
not tapered, squared, the corners ridged, the surface densely
covered with down-curved hair. Branches are absent or paired.
Stem leaves sometimes absent, but usually there is at least
one pair, greatly reduced in size, deeply pinnately lobed, with
very long hair on the midvein below. Inflorescence a raceme
at the apex, 4-12" (10-30 cm) long, with spaced whorls usually
of 6 flowers in the axils of ovate bracts, drooping on short
pedicels. Flowers (spring) 0.7-1.2" (18-30 mm) long, the calyx
dark purple-green with 5 hairy, pointed lobes. The corolla is
hairy, tubular, light blue, much longer than the calyx, the 2-lobed
lower lip extending well beyond the upper. Seeds dark brown,
about 2 mm long.
HABITAT: Open areas with little ground vegetation: roadsides,
lawns, forest clearings, especially on poor soil. Native.
FOOD USE: The basal leaves have a strange and terrible flavor,
and they are sandy. But the tender shoots are just barely good
enough to eat on purpose. Try them in spring well before they
bloom. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is a really neat-looking plant even if it's not
the best to eat, and it is remarkably common. It is better known
as a medicinal than an edible. AKA cancer weed.
306
4 Salvia lyrata Lamiaceae (Mint family) Lyre-leaf sage 1 rosette of hairy, pinnately-lobed leaves, difficulty often 1. QUICK CHECK: Ground-hugging square stem and basal a raceme of irregular tubular flowers. ID 6-15 in a with purple zones, short rhizome with fibrous roots. Basal leaves lobed with a DESCRIPTION: Perennial from ground, a 4-8" (10-20 cm) long, deeply pinnately midvein, strongly rosette, usually terminal hugging section, the the lobes blunt, sometimes cut fully hairy. to the Veins very deeply ruffled, very large with no space between the depressed them. parts Both dark surfaces purple are (especially densely in winter). Margins winged. often The purple midrib with is whitish, widely spaced, depressed broad, above, nipple-tipped with teeth. Petiole short, contrasting deeply channeled sharply with or broadly the dark blade. Stem to 26" (66 cm) tall and 5 mm thick, usually single and erect (sometimes there are a few small, leaning stems beside the main one), solid, not tapered, squared, the corners ridged, the surface densely covered with down-curved hair. Branches are absent or paired. Stem leaves sometimes absent, but usually there is at least one pair, greatly reduced in size, deeply pinnately lobed, with very long hair on the midvein below. Inflorescence a raceme at the apex, 4-12" (10-30 cm) long, with spaced whorls usually of 6 flowers in the axils of ovate bracts, drooping on short pedicels. Flowers (spring) 0.7-1.2" (18-30 mm) long, the calyx dark purple-green with 5 hairy, pointed lobes. The corolla is hairy, tubular, light blue, much longer than the calyx, the 2-lobed lower lip extending well beyond the upper. Seeds dark brown, about 2 mm long. HABITAT: Open areas with little ground vegetation: roadsides, lawns, forest clearings, especially on poor soil. Native. FOOD USE: The basal leaves have a strange and terrible flavor, and they are sandy. But the tender shoots are just barely good enough to eat on purpose. Try them in spring well before they bloom. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is a really neat-looking plant even if it's not the best to eat, and it is remarkably common. It is better known as a medicinal than an edible. AKA cancer weed. 306 