OR
(Mint
family)
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED
5 Cup plant
2
2
Silphium perfoliatum Asteraceae (Composite family)
Basa
leaves-
QUICK CHECK: Large, clump-forming herh with
lanceolate leaves with petioles forming a cup at the hase ID difficulty 1.
Veins
DESCRIPTION: leaves in rosette Perennial of forming colonies by rhizome, the crowns
lobes, 6-9" a 4-6, wilting as the stems appear. Blades are lanc eolate lose together Basal
Margins
surface is dark (15-23 cm) long, the tips pointed with a dark, hardened with arrowhead
is pale and green with short, stiff hairs giving a sandpapery feel; protoberance. the Upper
tips. Petioles Margins with irregular, very large, obtuse, abruptly Secondary veins are
above and green protrude rubbery below. with sparse, softer hairs confined to major veins, lower surface
ish, with 100-140% of blade length, solid, with scattered hairs, broadly V-channeled. pointed teeth with
margins green wings. Stems one per rosette, sometimes purplish at the base the
unbranched, erect, 5-8' (1.5-2.5 m) tall, to 0,7" (18 mm) thick, glossy and hairless; when young
solid and squared, each angle with a prominent ridge. There are bulges or ridges in cross
LYDS prominent, squared. Stem leaves paired, similar to basal but on shorter petioles crosswise
enlarge at the base and fuse with those of the opposing leaf to form a cup that may hold water. Inflorescent
spreading cluster of heads widely spaced on smooth peduncles 3-4 mm thick and 2-4' (5-10)
cupped conjoined bracts below each juncture. Flower heads sunflower-like, 2.5-3.5" (6.5-9
rays long and narrow, in a single ring, not touching at the base. Disk florets 3 mm across, yellow
column in the center. Bracts behind the head are layered, hairless, glossy, and broadly ovate
HABITAT: Full to partial sunlight in rich, moist soil. Field edges, roadsides and ditches, forest
prairies, especially in floodplains. Native.
FOOD USE: Young shoots, generally a foot or less in height, can be peeled and eaten raw or CGO?
petioles can also be used and need not be peeled. The leaves themselves are edible when
have a strong, bitter flavor. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: The petioles taste milder than the leaves, and the peeled shoots are pretty good
attractive plant, often grown ornamentally, and is easy to grow in almost any soil. A colony you pla
to outlive you. Treefrogs like to sit on the leaves next to the little water pools.
OR (Mint family) BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED 5 Cup plant 2 2 Silphium perfoliatum Asteraceae (Composite family) Basa leaves- QUICK CHECK: Large, clump-forming herh with lanceolate leaves with petioles forming a cup at the hase ID difficulty 1. Veins DESCRIPTION: leaves in rosette Perennial of forming colonies by rhizome, the crowns lobes, 6-9" a 4-6, wilting as the stems appear. Blades are lanc eolate lose together Basal Margins surface is dark (15-23 cm) long, the tips pointed with a dark, hardened with arrowhead is pale and green with short, stiff hairs giving a sandpapery feel; protoberance. the Upper tips. Petioles Margins with irregular, very large, obtuse, abruptly Secondary veins are above and green protrude rubbery below. with sparse, softer hairs confined to major veins, lower surface ish, with 100-140% of blade length, solid, with scattered hairs, broadly V-channeled. pointed teeth with margins green wings. Stems one per rosette, sometimes purplish at the base the unbranched, erect, 5-8' (1.5-2.5 m) tall, to 0,7" (18 mm) thick, glossy and hairless; when young solid and squared, each angle with a prominent ridge. There are bulges or ridges in cross LYDS prominent, squared. Stem leaves paired, similar to basal but on shorter petioles crosswise enlarge at the base and fuse with those of the opposing leaf to form a cup that may hold water. Inflorescent spreading cluster of heads widely spaced on smooth peduncles 3-4 mm thick and 2-4' (5-10) cupped conjoined bracts below each juncture. Flower heads sunflower-like, 2.5-3.5" (6.5-9 rays long and narrow, in a single ring, not touching at the base. Disk florets 3 mm across, yellow column in the center. Bracts behind the head are layered, hairless, glossy, and broadly ovate HABITAT: Full to partial sunlight in rich, moist soil. Field edges, roadsides and ditches, forest prairies, especially in floodplains. Native. FOOD USE: Young shoots, generally a foot or less in height, can be peeled and eaten raw or CGO? petioles can also be used and need not be peeled. The leaves themselves are edible when have a strong, bitter flavor. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: The petioles taste milder than the leaves, and the peeled shoots are pretty good attractive plant, often grown ornamentally, and is easy to grow in almost any soil. A colony you pla to outlive you. Treefrogs like to sit on the leaves next to the little water pools. 