mm
0
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED
7 Spring beauty
3
2
genus Claytonia
family Montiaceae
flowers QUICK CHECK: with 5 petals, Single leaning pair of to thick, one side. succulent ID difficulty leaves on 1. car stom:
DESCRIPTION: leaves from Low, succulent, perennial spring ephemeral,
pointed range at the tip and linear to broadly ovate. They are thick and hairless all parts with hairless Basal
may be faintly visible-otherwise tapered at the base, Midvein lightly incised; entire margins,
channeled. Stems in of the veins are obscure. Petioles 60-100% a few secondary of yeins
thick, solid, clumps 3-12 (occasionally more), 3-5" (8-13 blade length.
leaves. Stem roundish, leaves weakly erect to leaning or prostrate. Each stem c.m) bears long and 2-3mm
beauty
raceme of similar to basal, but the petioles are much shorter. one pair of
long 5-12 (at first appearing like an umbel before the rachis lengthens), Inflorescence a
on pedicels a of pedicel, these oriented to one side, the mature raceme 4-6" (10-15 each flower
unopened flowers droop. Flowers (early spring) 0.5-0.6" across cm) with long. The
overlapping darker sepals and 5 obovate petals, narrowed to a stalk-like base, pink or white 2 blunt.
pink or purple veins. There are 5 stamens with bright pink anthers. The flowers with
a few seeds.
close at night and on cloudy days. Fruit is a tiny egg-shaped to round capsule containing
SPECIES: Virginia spring beauty C. virginica is widespread in eastern woodlands The leaves
are narrow and linear, with no veins visible but the midvein. Carolina spring beauty C. carolinic
rocky or mountainous forests. The leaves are elliptic to ovate and have a few secondary veins harer
HABITAT: Rich hardwood forests, especially those dominated by sugar maple, elm, basswood or
hickory, and white ash. Native.
Claytonia virginica tubers.
Claytonia virginica flowers.
Claytonia virginica
FOOD USE: Dig up tubers with a small trowel or digging stick. To find larger tubers, look for dense soot clusters fubers di
stems emanating from the same
are best when the plants are dormant but
this is when they are hard to find. They may
irritate the mouth when eaten raw. cooked
they are like miniature potatoes. out softer
and sweeter. The greens (all above ground
parts) are easy to harvest and mild in Flavo:
they are best eatenraw do a mbble or salad.
Conservation 3/2,
COMMENTS: These epnemera visible
for only four to nine weeks III 113 then they
for the summer In sume ireas make
wither emarkably abundant. Both species depate
equally whether the USO tuber. corn (If
are excellent lood. People like to ractut's
laytend coliniana
309
mm 0 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED 7 Spring beauty 3 2 genus Claytonia family Montiaceae flowers QUICK CHECK: with 5 petals, Single leaning pair of to thick, one side. succulent ID difficulty leaves on 1. car stom: DESCRIPTION: leaves from Low, succulent, perennial spring ephemeral, pointed range at the tip and linear to broadly ovate. They are thick and hairless all parts with hairless Basal may be faintly visible-otherwise tapered at the base, Midvein lightly incised; entire margins, channeled. Stems in of the veins are obscure. Petioles 60-100% a few secondary of yeins thick, solid, clumps 3-12 (occasionally more), 3-5" (8-13 blade length. leaves. Stem roundish, leaves weakly erect to leaning or prostrate. Each stem c.m) bears long and 2-3mm beauty raceme of similar to basal, but the petioles are much shorter. one pair of long 5-12 (at first appearing like an umbel before the rachis lengthens), Inflorescence a on pedicels a of pedicel, these oriented to one side, the mature raceme 4-6" (10-15 each flower unopened flowers droop. Flowers (early spring) 0.5-0.6" across cm) with long. The overlapping darker sepals and 5 obovate petals, narrowed to a stalk-like base, pink or white 2 blunt. pink or purple veins. There are 5 stamens with bright pink anthers. The flowers with a few seeds. close at night and on cloudy days. Fruit is a tiny egg-shaped to round capsule containing SPECIES: Virginia spring beauty C. virginica is widespread in eastern woodlands The leaves are narrow and linear, with no veins visible but the midvein. Carolina spring beauty C. carolinic rocky or mountainous forests. The leaves are elliptic to ovate and have a few secondary veins harer HABITAT: Rich hardwood forests, especially those dominated by sugar maple, elm, basswood or hickory, and white ash. Native. Claytonia virginica tubers. Claytonia virginica flowers. Claytonia virginica FOOD USE: Dig up tubers with a small trowel or digging stick. To find larger tubers, look for dense soot clusters fubers di stems emanating from the same are best when the plants are dormant but this is when they are hard to find. They may irritate the mouth when eaten raw. cooked they are like miniature potatoes. out softer and sweeter. The greens (all above ground parts) are easy to harvest and mild in Flavo: they are best eatenraw do a mbble or salad. Conservation 3/2, COMMENTS: These epnemera visible for only four to nine weeks III 113 then they for the summer In sume ireas make wither emarkably abundant. Both species depate equally whether the USO tuber. corn (If are excellent lood. People like to ractut's laytend coliniana 309 