BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR
6 Cornsalad
2
genus Valerianella
family Caprifoliaceae
QUICK CHECK: Short herb with forked, angled stems and blunt, paired, clasping leaves
with a few large teeth; tiny tightly-clustered flowers. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Winter annual herbs, with rosette leaves withering around flowering
time. Basal leaves (and lowest stem leaves) are spoon-shaped, 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long,
broadest near the rounded tip and tapered to the sessile base, usually entire. Blades are
light green, delicate, hairless or with very fine hairs on top, but the margins are usually
hairy. Stems to 28" (70 cm) tall, proportionately thick, Y-forking near the top or bottom, sparsely branched,
hollow, angled with winged ridges, usually hairy on the angles. Stem leaves 1-2.5" (25-65 mm) long, paired,
clasping, slightly broader near the base and tapering to a blunt tip, the margins with short hairs and a few
prominent teeth, often only near the base. Nodes are widely spaced-up to 5" (13 cm). Midvein and secondary
veins depressed above; 2 major secondary veins arise near the base and arc toward the tip before becoming
obscure. Veinlets above are flat to faintly raised. Inflorescence a dense terminal cluster of 16-25 with a nearly
flat layer of many overlapping bracts underneath. Flowers white to very pale blue, 1-2 mm across, tubular at the
base with 5 petal-like spreading lobes at the tip. Fruits brown, egg-shaped, angled, 2 mm long.
SPECIES: There are several,
native and introduced, which
can be hard to tell apart. All are
edible.
HABITAT: Moist, rich, disturbed
soil in full sun to partial shade.
FOOD USE: Gather tender
growth in spring and eat raw or
cooked. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This green is
often abundant but overlooked.
The greens are tender and the
flavor ranges from very good to
mediocre. V. locusta, our most
common exotic species, is culti-
vated and can be found in many
seed catalogs, AKA lamb's let-
tuce, mache.
308
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR 6 Cornsalad 2 genus Valerianella family Caprifoliaceae QUICK CHECK: Short herb with forked, angled stems and blunt, paired, clasping leaves with a few large teeth; tiny tightly-clustered flowers. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Winter annual herbs, with rosette leaves withering around flowering time. Basal leaves (and lowest stem leaves) are spoon-shaped, 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long, broadest near the rounded tip and tapered to the sessile base, usually entire. Blades are light green, delicate, hairless or with very fine hairs on top, but the margins are usually hairy. Stems to 28" (70 cm) tall, proportionately thick, Y-forking near the top or bottom, sparsely branched, hollow, angled with winged ridges, usually hairy on the angles. Stem leaves 1-2.5" (25-65 mm) long, paired, clasping, slightly broader near the base and tapering to a blunt tip, the margins with short hairs and a few prominent teeth, often only near the base. Nodes are widely spaced-up to 5" (13 cm). Midvein and secondary veins depressed above; 2 major secondary veins arise near the base and arc toward the tip before becoming obscure. Veinlets above are flat to faintly raised. Inflorescence a dense terminal cluster of 16-25 with a nearly flat layer of many overlapping bracts underneath. Flowers white to very pale blue, 1-2 mm across, tubular at the base with 5 petal-like spreading lobes at the tip. Fruits brown, egg-shaped, angled, 2 mm long. SPECIES: There are several, native and introduced, which can be hard to tell apart. All are edible. HABITAT: Moist, rich, disturbed soil in full sun to partial shade. FOOD USE: Gather tender growth in spring and eat raw or cooked. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This green is often abundant but overlooked. The greens are tender and the flavor ranges from very good to mediocre. V. locusta, our most common exotic species, is culti- vated and can be found in many seed catalogs, AKA lamb's let- tuce, mache. 308 