0
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED
9
Bladder campion
3
IWE-51
Silene vulgaris and S. cserii Caryophyllaceae (Pink family)
QUICK with CHECK: Hairless plant with clumped stems and sessile paired leaves. white
owers a bladder-like base. ID difficulty 2.
broadly ovate, glaucous, entire, hairless except for very fine hair on the cm) long,
DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Basal leaves (withered by flowering) 1-4" (2.5-10
midvein below keeled proximally. Stems clumped, weakly erect to leaning or margins, decumbent, the
18-36" (46-90 cm) long and 3-6 mm thick, smooth and hairless with a light bloom, light
green except for an occasional hint of red above the bulging nodes; round in cross section with a small hollow
center. Stem leaves 1-1.5" (2.5-4 cm) long, in widely-spaced pairs, curved and sessile at the base, usually
clasping, often downcurved at the sharp tip. Near the stem base they are ovate to elliptic or oblanceolate:
distally they become lanceolate with evenly tapered sides. Blades light green and smooth with a prominently
pale midvein that protrudes slightly below. Secondary veins faint, about 30° to the midvein, curving back
toward the center, flat to faintly raised above. Leaves squeak when rubbed together. Inflorescence a loose panicle
with broadly Y-forking branches with a pair of bracts at each fork, held above the leaves on a naked peduncle
6-8" (15-20 cm) long. Flowers with an inflated, smooth, hairless, bladder-like calyx 8-13 mm long, pale green
with purplish veins. There are 5 petals, each deeply cleft and thus resembling two, wavy at the tip: stamens
protrude 10-12 mm beyond the petals. Fruit a dry, 3-chambered capsule with numerous seeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Soapwort or bouncing bet Saponaria officinalis (not edible) has depressed seconder
veins that arch back to the leaf tip; it is a larger, erect plant forming colonies by rhizome.
HABITAT: Full sun in dry, rocky or sandy, disturbed soil, Common
roadsides, yards, building sites, abandoned farmland, waste places
Introduced.
FOOD USE: Collect the tender young leaves and stems in spring and
early summer, before the plant flowers. Tender tips with flower buds are
good through mid summer. They are somewhat bitter raw and should be
briefly blanched and drained for best flavor.
COMMENTS: This beautiful and abundant weed is not well known as a wild
edible but the delightful greens certainly deserve more attention. It is a very
popular foraged green in the Mediterranean region. AKA Silene cucubalis.
Silene cserii about to bloom.
Very young shoot.
Older shoot.
3"
0 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED 9 Bladder campion 3 IWE-51 Silene vulgaris and S. cserii Caryophyllaceae (Pink family) QUICK with CHECK: Hairless plant with clumped stems and sessile paired leaves. white owers a bladder-like base. ID difficulty 2. broadly ovate, glaucous, entire, hairless except for very fine hair on the cm) long, DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Basal leaves (withered by flowering) 1-4" (2.5-10 midvein below keeled proximally. Stems clumped, weakly erect to leaning or margins, decumbent, the 18-36" (46-90 cm) long and 3-6 mm thick, smooth and hairless with a light bloom, light green except for an occasional hint of red above the bulging nodes; round in cross section with a small hollow center. Stem leaves 1-1.5" (2.5-4 cm) long, in widely-spaced pairs, curved and sessile at the base, usually clasping, often downcurved at the sharp tip. Near the stem base they are ovate to elliptic or oblanceolate: distally they become lanceolate with evenly tapered sides. Blades light green and smooth with a prominently pale midvein that protrudes slightly below. Secondary veins faint, about 30° to the midvein, curving back toward the center, flat to faintly raised above. Leaves squeak when rubbed together. Inflorescence a loose panicle with broadly Y-forking branches with a pair of bracts at each fork, held above the leaves on a naked peduncle 6-8" (15-20 cm) long. Flowers with an inflated, smooth, hairless, bladder-like calyx 8-13 mm long, pale green with purplish veins. There are 5 petals, each deeply cleft and thus resembling two, wavy at the tip: stamens protrude 10-12 mm beyond the petals. Fruit a dry, 3-chambered capsule with numerous seeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: Soapwort or bouncing bet Saponaria officinalis (not edible) has depressed seconder veins that arch back to the leaf tip; it is a larger, erect plant forming colonies by rhizome. HABITAT: Full sun in dry, rocky or sandy, disturbed soil, Common roadsides, yards, building sites, abandoned farmland, waste places Introduced. FOOD USE: Collect the tender young leaves and stems in spring and early summer, before the plant flowers. Tender tips with flower buds are good through mid summer. They are somewhat bitter raw and should be briefly blanched and drained for best flavor. COMMENTS: This beautiful and abundant weed is not well known as a wild edible but the delightful greens certainly deserve more attention. It is a very popular foraged green in the Mediterranean region. AKA Silene cucubalis. Silene cserii about to bloom. Very young shoot. Older shoot. 3" 