BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED
8 Heal-all
Prunella vulgaris 1 Lamiaceae (Mint family)
CHECK: Low, non-aromatic mint with hairy petiole margins, difficulty mostly 3. toothless
leaves, QUICK and flowers in a single large, dense, terminal spike. ID
Perennial spreading by rhizomes and creeping stems; it overwinters leaves entire, as
DESCRIPTION: that disappears by flowering. Non-aromatic. Basal secondary veins
an evergreen rosette on petioles about equal to blade length, the midvein and the base of
sparsely hairy, but veinlets faint and flat. Stems often multiple (or branched near modified
the depressed erect to 14" (36 cm) tall, usually unbranched, solid, squared in a
2 portion), sides are larger, convex, and rounded, while the other 2 sides are smaller and or has depressed sparse, soft into
way: opposite The position of the groove alternates between nodes. The lower stem is hairless (4-8 cm) long,
ovate, entire or scarcely and bluntly toothed. Surface has scattered, leaning hairs growing from thin bumps
hairs-especially a groove. on the angles; the upper stem is hairier and squarer. Leaves paired, 1.5-3" small
on top; the undersides are hairy mostly on the veins. Petioles channeled, hairy, the margins with a leafy
wing; 60-120% of blade length near the plant's base, but short and almost sessile on the upper stem. Inflo-
rescence a proportionately large, cylindrical, terminal spike of densely-packed flowers layered with rounded
bracts, each bract with a bristle tip. Flowers irregular, tubular, with 2 lips; the
upper lip is longer and purple, while the lower lip is light purple to white and
has 3 lobes, the middle one with long teeth.
CONFUSING PLANTS: When young may be easily confused with fringed
loosestrife Lysimachia ciliata (edibility unknown but it sure doesn't taste good).
Fringed loosestrife emerges earlier and has single stems, without rosettes,
that do not creep at the base. The stem is squared with blunt angles but lacks
the grooves of heal-all, and has a small hollow in the center. The leaves are
typically coppery-purple when young. The petioles lack leafy wings and have
more and longer hairs on the margins. Otherwise the plant is nearly hairless.
HABITAT: Full to partial sunlight on moist soil of almost any type; well drained
to mucky or clay, Abundant in fields, meadows, forest edges, and along trails
and forest roads. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather tender young leaves in spring or early summer. They can
be eatén raw but are better cooked-indeed, better when boiled with one water
poured off. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This herb is better known as a medicinal. It is among the poorer
leafy greens included in this book, only worth mentioning as food because it is
so ubiquitous. To be worth eating, the leaves must be collected at their tender-
est, from the top of robust stems in spring. AKA self-heal.
Winter rosette
310
Spring greens.
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED 8 Heal-all Prunella vulgaris 1 Lamiaceae (Mint family) CHECK: Low, non-aromatic mint with hairy petiole margins, difficulty mostly 3. toothless leaves, QUICK and flowers in a single large, dense, terminal spike. ID Perennial spreading by rhizomes and creeping stems; it overwinters leaves entire, as DESCRIPTION: that disappears by flowering. Non-aromatic. Basal secondary veins an evergreen rosette on petioles about equal to blade length, the midvein and the base of sparsely hairy, but veinlets faint and flat. Stems often multiple (or branched near modified the depressed erect to 14" (36 cm) tall, usually unbranched, solid, squared in a 2 portion), sides are larger, convex, and rounded, while the other 2 sides are smaller and or has depressed sparse, soft into way: opposite The position of the groove alternates between nodes. The lower stem is hairless (4-8 cm) long, ovate, entire or scarcely and bluntly toothed. Surface has scattered, leaning hairs growing from thin bumps hairs-especially a groove. on the angles; the upper stem is hairier and squarer. Leaves paired, 1.5-3" small on top; the undersides are hairy mostly on the veins. Petioles channeled, hairy, the margins with a leafy wing; 60-120% of blade length near the plant's base, but short and almost sessile on the upper stem. Inflo- rescence a proportionately large, cylindrical, terminal spike of densely-packed flowers layered with rounded bracts, each bract with a bristle tip. Flowers irregular, tubular, with 2 lips; the upper lip is longer and purple, while the lower lip is light purple to white and has 3 lobes, the middle one with long teeth. CONFUSING PLANTS: When young may be easily confused with fringed loosestrife Lysimachia ciliata (edibility unknown but it sure doesn't taste good). Fringed loosestrife emerges earlier and has single stems, without rosettes, that do not creep at the base. The stem is squared with blunt angles but lacks the grooves of heal-all, and has a small hollow in the center. The leaves are typically coppery-purple when young. The petioles lack leafy wings and have more and longer hairs on the margins. Otherwise the plant is nearly hairless. HABITAT: Full to partial sunlight on moist soil of almost any type; well drained to mucky or clay, Abundant in fields, meadows, forest edges, and along trails and forest roads. Native. FOOD USE: Gather tender young leaves in spring or early summer. They can be eatén raw but are better cooked-indeed, better when boiled with one water poured off. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This herb is better known as a medicinal. It is among the poorer leafy greens included in this book, only worth mentioning as food because it is so ubiquitous. To be worth eating, the leaves must be collected at their tender- est, from the top of robust stems in spring. AKA self-heal. Winter rosette 310 Spring greens. 