BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED
IWE-54
OF
White alba campion Caryophyllaceae (Pink family)
Silene Thigh high imp. fuzzy-stemmed difficulty We edy plant 2. with entire, hairy, paired
DESCRIPTION: leaves and showy Short-lived perennial. Basal leaves veins similar few, diverging to stem leaves from the but midvein larger multiple, and in
QUICK NECK bladder-like white Howers. ID
broader they half of wither the leaf by flowering and gently Secondary curving back to mm) converge thick, at round the tip. with Stems a thick-walled
the lower leaning, to 40" (1 m) long and 0.6' (15 enlarged and lighter green above each node. internodes. repeatedly Stem
branching hollow. spreading densely or or forking covered at 35-40°. with long, The soft, top half curvy of the hair. plant has very few leaves and long, straight
leaves tapered to the base with a
broadly winged petiole, V-channeled
and keeled below. They are ovate to
elliptic, entire, acute-pointed at the
tip, the lower ones 2-5" (5-13 cm)
long, very hairy on both sides and the
margin, often with a pair of smaller
leaves in the axil (a branch bud wait-
ing to grow). Each fork in the upper
half has a pair of reduced, ovate to
lanceolate, acuminate leaves, often
with purple margins. Midvein and
secondary veins are deeply depressed
above and protruding below. Inflo-
rescence a cluster of 3-15 at branch
tips, branching widely, the pedicels
hairy. Flowers with ovate bracts and
a bladder-like calyx 0.5-1" (13-25 mm)
lorig, hairy and ridged, the ridges pur-
plish. sometimes with white streaks
between them. Corolla 0.6-1" (15-
25 mm) across, the 5 white petals
spreading abruptly. each cut deeply
into 2 rounded, blunt-tipped lobes.
Fruit a broadly egg-shaped dry rat-
rly capsule containing numerous tiny
seeds.
HABITAT: Sunny, disturbed sites
with moderate soil moisture. Hay-
fields, backyards, meadows, road-
sides, pastures. ditches. Introduced.
FOOD USE: The tender young leaves
caribe eaten cooked. (Raw their flavor
Erather strong ) Pick them in spring
wellin advance of flowering
COMMENTS: This is one of our most
abundant and widespread weeds
Many people call while campion
bladder campion." which has led to
mur confusion IT. disc ussing these
harbles, be Cause when ampton lla
Jor and lexture are distinc 11, interior
is blodder campion AKA Silene luti
falio, hrus alba
372
129
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED IWE-54 OF White alba campion Caryophyllaceae (Pink family) Silene Thigh high imp. fuzzy-stemmed difficulty We edy plant 2. with entire, hairy, paired DESCRIPTION: leaves and showy Short-lived perennial. Basal leaves veins similar few, diverging to stem leaves from the but midvein larger multiple, and in QUICK NECK bladder-like white Howers. ID broader they half of wither the leaf by flowering and gently Secondary curving back to mm) converge thick, at round the tip. with Stems a thick-walled the lower leaning, to 40" (1 m) long and 0.6' (15 enlarged and lighter green above each node. internodes. repeatedly Stem branching hollow. spreading densely or or forking covered at 35-40°. with long, The soft, top half curvy of the hair. plant has very few leaves and long, straight leaves tapered to the base with a broadly winged petiole, V-channeled and keeled below. They are ovate to elliptic, entire, acute-pointed at the tip, the lower ones 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, very hairy on both sides and the margin, often with a pair of smaller leaves in the axil (a branch bud wait- ing to grow). Each fork in the upper half has a pair of reduced, ovate to lanceolate, acuminate leaves, often with purple margins. Midvein and secondary veins are deeply depressed above and protruding below. Inflo- rescence a cluster of 3-15 at branch tips, branching widely, the pedicels hairy. Flowers with ovate bracts and a bladder-like calyx 0.5-1" (13-25 mm) lorig, hairy and ridged, the ridges pur- plish. sometimes with white streaks between them. Corolla 0.6-1" (15- 25 mm) across, the 5 white petals spreading abruptly. each cut deeply into 2 rounded, blunt-tipped lobes. Fruit a broadly egg-shaped dry rat- rly capsule containing numerous tiny seeds. HABITAT: Sunny, disturbed sites with moderate soil moisture. Hay- fields, backyards, meadows, road- sides, pastures. ditches. Introduced. FOOD USE: The tender young leaves caribe eaten cooked. (Raw their flavor Erather strong ) Pick them in spring wellin advance of flowering COMMENTS: This is one of our most abundant and widespread weeds Many people call while campion bladder campion." which has led to mur confusion IT. disc ussing these harbles, be Cause when ampton lla Jor and lexture are distinc 11, interior is blodder campion AKA Silene luti falio, hrus alba 372 129 