BASAL LEAVES.PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED
11
Mayapple
3
NG-116
Podophyllum peltatum family Berberidaceae
the QUICK petioles CHECK: diverge. 2 large, ID difficulty palmately 1. lobed leaves bearing a single Flower 07
leaves DESCRIPTION: single, to 16" Perennial (40 herb forming often extensive colonies
from a whitish cm) across, roundish in outline, with 5-10 by rhizome. Basal
often sub-lobed center spot, the sinuses cut almost to the leaf center, primary the lobes radiating
their size. Surface or notched at the end, abruptly pointed. Leaves thin lobes drooping and
veins) and hairless above, gray-green and sparsely hairy on are the underside and delicate for
projections. depressed Petioles above and flat below. Margins have scattered, erratic below; teeth with veinlets
scarcely margins. Major veins strongly depressed above and protruding (hairier on
attached at the erect, smooth, round, hollow, hairless, proportionately thick, light-colored. claw like
and leaf center. Stems to 34" (86 cm) tall and 0.4-0.7" (10-18 mm) thick, smooth, 14-26" (36-55 cm) iall
the forking supporting two leaves, rising slightly higher than the basal leaves. Stem leaves round, hairless
and have 4-7 primary lobes. Flowers (mid spring) always single, hidden by leaves, nodding attached on toward
(2:5-3.8 cm) pedicel from the fork in the stem, 1.2-2" (3-5 cm) across with 6-9 waxy, broad, white deta's a 1-1.5"
the stamens dull yellow and not extending past the very thick creamy pistil/ovary. Fruits egg or kiw -shaper"
1-2.5) (25-64 mm) long, dull yellow when ripe, smooth at first but eventually becoming brown and cream -
or wrinkly. The interior is soft and pulpy with numerous seeds 4-5 mm long.
HABITAT: Hardwood forests with rich, well-drained soil and light to moderate shade, wooded past
forest edges, clearings, roadsides in forested regions. Native.
FOOD USE: Mayapples do not ripen in May. Gather them from early summer (in the South) to late
(in the North) when they are dull yellow or straw-colored and the pulp is very soft. At this time, the
may be wilting or broken over. Suck out the pulp for a delicious snack, but spit out the somewhat toxic seed:
Mayapple pulp also makes excellent jam, jelly, juice, or pie. The skins are bitter. Unripe fruir
tastes terrible. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This delicious, interesting fruit is highly regarded among foragers, and with good reason Fruit
ing is highly variable and erratic. Large colonies may go years producing little to no fruit-this often happens
when they are on the decline due to increasing shade or deer depredation. The most productive colonies have
large plants and grow in sunny spots.
BASAL LEAVES.PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED 11 Mayapple 3 NG-116 Podophyllum peltatum family Berberidaceae the QUICK petioles CHECK: diverge. 2 large, ID difficulty palmately 1. lobed leaves bearing a single Flower 07 leaves DESCRIPTION: single, to 16" Perennial (40 herb forming often extensive colonies from a whitish cm) across, roundish in outline, with 5-10 by rhizome. Basal often sub-lobed center spot, the sinuses cut almost to the leaf center, primary the lobes radiating their size. Surface or notched at the end, abruptly pointed. Leaves thin lobes drooping and veins) and hairless above, gray-green and sparsely hairy on are the underside and delicate for projections. depressed Petioles above and flat below. Margins have scattered, erratic below; teeth with veinlets scarcely margins. Major veins strongly depressed above and protruding (hairier on attached at the erect, smooth, round, hollow, hairless, proportionately thick, light-colored. claw like and leaf center. Stems to 34" (86 cm) tall and 0.4-0.7" (10-18 mm) thick, smooth, 14-26" (36-55 cm) iall the forking supporting two leaves, rising slightly higher than the basal leaves. Stem leaves round, hairless and have 4-7 primary lobes. Flowers (mid spring) always single, hidden by leaves, nodding attached on toward (2:5-3.8 cm) pedicel from the fork in the stem, 1.2-2" (3-5 cm) across with 6-9 waxy, broad, white deta's a 1-1.5" the stamens dull yellow and not extending past the very thick creamy pistil/ovary. Fruits egg or kiw -shaper" 1-2.5) (25-64 mm) long, dull yellow when ripe, smooth at first but eventually becoming brown and cream - or wrinkly. The interior is soft and pulpy with numerous seeds 4-5 mm long. HABITAT: Hardwood forests with rich, well-drained soil and light to moderate shade, wooded past forest edges, clearings, roadsides in forested regions. Native. FOOD USE: Mayapples do not ripen in May. Gather them from early summer (in the South) to late (in the North) when they are dull yellow or straw-colored and the pulp is very soft. At this time, the may be wilting or broken over. Suck out the pulp for a delicious snack, but spit out the somewhat toxic seed: Mayapple pulp also makes excellent jam, jelly, juice, or pie. The skins are bitter. Unripe fruir tastes terrible. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This delicious, interesting fruit is highly regarded among foragers, and with good reason Fruit ing is highly variable and erratic. Large colonies may go years producing little to no fruit-this often happens when they are on the decline due to increasing shade or deer depredation. The most productive colonies have large plants and grow in sunny spots. 