BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED
NG-244
12
Dentaria Cut-leaf laciniata toothwort Brassicaceae 2 (Mustard family)
Short, term like mustard with 3 deeply divided, ID difficulty palmate 2. leaves on the
QUICK CHECK of 4 petal white to pink flowers.
flowering stems, Lac Spring emes ephemeral forming colonies from or white, tubers constricted connected into weakly short in
DESCRIPTION: long, greenish, yellow, smooth except
chains. Tubers 0.4-1" touching (1-2.5 at cm) the tip and breaking apart easily, the to surface 6" (15 cm) across and
for tooth-like a few "eyes." sections Non-flowering these are 3 plants times produce compound/divided, a single basal the leaf final divisions/leaflets to the midvein sessile on one or side with but a very not
about equally long; deeply lobed to divided, often fully The surface
short wing-channeled narrow, petiolule. erratic Leaflets teeth or small lobes of variable size, with nipple below; tips. smaller upper veins flat.
the other, with are long, faintly hairy. Major veins slightly depressed above and protruding in cross section, becoming
and margins solid, 6-12" (15-30 tall, with sparse, soft, fine hairs; D-shaped and the blade. Stems smooth,
shallowly channeled hairy, solid, roughly triangular in cross section, straight and unbranched, (often offset),
Petioles erect, in the upper part, with a scar about halfway between the base to 16" (40 cm)
hairless to leaves faintly similar in form to the basal leaves but arranged in a whorl-like set of 3 on
tall. broadly Stem wing-channeled petioles about 15% of blade length. Inflorescence a single raceme of 5-20 rising 4-8"
(10-20 cm) above the leaves on a soft-hairy peduncle, the pedicels 0.6-0.9" (15-23 mm). Flowers 11-14 mm
long, white to pinkish, with four petais about twice as long as the sepals. Fruit a narrow pod about an inch
long, normally held horizontally upon ripening.
HABITAT: Hardwood forests with rich soil. Native.
FOOD USE: Tubers, found just beneath the surface, have a strong flavor of horseradish and can be used
similarly as a seasoning. The entire above-ground portion of the plant can be used as greens, which have a
milder horseradish flavor and are good on sandwiches. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: A good plant to know if you like horseradish. Toothwort greens are available for only a short
time; this is one of the earliest spring ephemerals to die back. The long-standing taxonomic debate regard-
ing toothworts is whether or not to lump them together with the bittercresses in the genus Cardamine. I keep
toothworts separate due to their distinct form. Some people claim they are called "tooth" worts because the
leaves are toothed (like 6,000 other plants in North America). Others claim that the bumps on the rhizomes
of certain species are "teeth." (I doubt it.) Maybe it's because the tubers look almost exactly like canine teeth.
AKA Cardamine concatenata.
314
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED NG-244 12 Dentaria Cut-leaf laciniata toothwort Brassicaceae 2 (Mustard family) Short, term like mustard with 3 deeply divided, ID difficulty palmate 2. leaves on the QUICK CHECK of 4 petal white to pink flowers. flowering stems, Lac Spring emes ephemeral forming colonies from or white, tubers constricted connected into weakly short in DESCRIPTION: long, greenish, yellow, smooth except chains. Tubers 0.4-1" touching (1-2.5 at cm) the tip and breaking apart easily, the to surface 6" (15 cm) across and for tooth-like a few "eyes." sections Non-flowering these are 3 plants times produce compound/divided, a single basal the leaf final divisions/leaflets to the midvein sessile on one or side with but a very not about equally long; deeply lobed to divided, often fully The surface short wing-channeled narrow, petiolule. erratic Leaflets teeth or small lobes of variable size, with nipple below; tips. smaller upper veins flat. the other, with are long, faintly hairy. Major veins slightly depressed above and protruding in cross section, becoming and margins solid, 6-12" (15-30 tall, with sparse, soft, fine hairs; D-shaped and the blade. Stems smooth, shallowly channeled hairy, solid, roughly triangular in cross section, straight and unbranched, (often offset), Petioles erect, in the upper part, with a scar about halfway between the base to 16" (40 cm) hairless to leaves faintly similar in form to the basal leaves but arranged in a whorl-like set of 3 on tall. broadly Stem wing-channeled petioles about 15% of blade length. Inflorescence a single raceme of 5-20 rising 4-8" (10-20 cm) above the leaves on a soft-hairy peduncle, the pedicels 0.6-0.9" (15-23 mm). Flowers 11-14 mm long, white to pinkish, with four petais about twice as long as the sepals. Fruit a narrow pod about an inch long, normally held horizontally upon ripening. HABITAT: Hardwood forests with rich soil. Native. FOOD USE: Tubers, found just beneath the surface, have a strong flavor of horseradish and can be used similarly as a seasoning. The entire above-ground portion of the plant can be used as greens, which have a milder horseradish flavor and are good on sandwiches. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: A good plant to know if you like horseradish. Toothwort greens are available for only a short time; this is one of the earliest spring ephemerals to die back. The long-standing taxonomic debate regard- ing toothworts is whether or not to lump them together with the bittercresses in the genus Cardamine. I keep toothworts separate due to their distinct form. Some people claim they are called "tooth" worts because the leaves are toothed (like 6,000 other plants in North America). Others claim that the bumps on the rhizomes of certain species are "teeth." (I doubt it.) Maybe it's because the tubers look almost exactly like canine teeth. AKA Cardamine concatenata. 314 