0
Icm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED
Related Thread-leaf edibles (both with rhizomes breaking into tooth like
13
toothwort
Dentaria
multifida
1 his species has 2-4 stem leaves. Basal and stem leaves both have fine, thread
sions. The whole plant is hairless. The greens are mild with only a faint horseradish like din
This species grows in high floodplains and other rich sites in the center of the Eastern flavor
Woodlands region. AKA Cardamine dissecta.
14 Slender toothwort Dentaria heterophylla
The basal leaves have 3 lanceolate to ovate leaflets, the margins erratically cut with large
teeth or small lobes. The stem has 2 or 3 leaves that are paired, whorled, or slightly offset,
each with 3 leaflets, much smaller and narrower than those of basal leaves. This species is
found in rich floodplain soils of the lower Midwest and Southeast. The flavor of the greens
is milder and less horseradishy than cut-leaf or broad-leaf toothwort. AKA Cardamine angustato
(top left) Slender toothwore
Dentaria heteropnyila.
(top right) Thread-leaf woth
wort Dentaria multindo
(bottom) These are the tobers
of out-lear toothword D.
ata (previous page' out both
D. multifide and D Reterophylid
have similar tooth shaped
tubers.
0 Icm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WHORLED Related Thread-leaf edibles (both with rhizomes breaking into tooth like 13 toothwort Dentaria multifida 1 his species has 2-4 stem leaves. Basal and stem leaves both have fine, thread sions. The whole plant is hairless. The greens are mild with only a faint horseradish like din This species grows in high floodplains and other rich sites in the center of the Eastern flavor Woodlands region. AKA Cardamine dissecta. 14 Slender toothwort Dentaria heterophylla The basal leaves have 3 lanceolate to ovate leaflets, the margins erratically cut with large teeth or small lobes. The stem has 2 or 3 leaves that are paired, whorled, or slightly offset, each with 3 leaflets, much smaller and narrower than those of basal leaves. This species is found in rich floodplain soils of the lower Midwest and Southeast. The flavor of the greens is milder and less horseradishy than cut-leaf or broad-leaf toothwort. AKA Cardamine angustato (top left) Slender toothwore Dentaria heteropnyila. (top right) Thread-leaf woth wort Dentaria multindo (bottom) These are the tobers of out-lear toothword D. ata (previous page' out both D. multifide and D Reterophylid have similar tooth shaped tubers. 