BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WH
15 Broad-leaved toothwort
2
Dentaria diphylla Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
CHECK Low colonial herb with 3 coarsely toothed leaflets per leaf; 2. 4-petal white
in QUICK pink flowers on a raceme rising well above the leaves. ID difficulty
Perennial forming colonies by rhizome, these 3-8 mm thick, flowering whitish,
DESCRIPTION: constricted and knobby with many old scars. Basal leaves absent broadly on ovate
irregularly borne separately and singly. They are compound with 3 winged,
leaflets stems-they 2-3.5" are (5-9 cm) long, the side leaflets asymmetrical, each leaflet on a short, near
petiolule up to 20% of blade length. There are 2-4 major secondary veins emanating have
base of the leaflet, light colored. slightly raised above and protruding below. Margins
large, the round-tipped teeth with a light-colored nipple. Petioles rounded with a faint channel, rising
3-8" (8-20 sparse. cm) high. Stems 6-16" (15-40 cm) tall, solid, roundish, smooth, hairless, never branched, bearing
only two leaves in an offset pair about on inch apart. Stem leaves smaller than the basal leaves with all leaflets
sessile; the blades have tiny, scarcely visible hairs and the veins may be slightly depressed above. Petioles of
stem leaves about 2" (5 cm) long, ascending, wing-channeled, rounded below. Inflorescence a raceme of 8-15,
erect above the leaves, the peduncle naked for about 5" (13 cm), the pedicels about 1" (2.5 cm). Flowers 0.6"
(15 mm) across with 4 blunt, white petals aging faintly pinkish. There are 4 green sepals with the tips curled
in; the stamens are green. Fruit a thin cylindrical pod.
HABITAT: Mature hardwood forests with well-drained, rich soil. Native.
FOOD USE: Rhizomes can be used as a horseradish-like seasoning. Greens can be eaten in salads, sandwiches,
etc., for their spicy flavor. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: This doesn't look much like cut-leaf toothwort at a glance, but the flavor is nearly identical.
AKA Cardamine diphylla.
316
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES PAIRED OR WH 15 Broad-leaved toothwort 2 Dentaria diphylla Brassicaceae (Mustard family) CHECK Low colonial herb with 3 coarsely toothed leaflets per leaf; 2. 4-petal white in QUICK pink flowers on a raceme rising well above the leaves. ID difficulty Perennial forming colonies by rhizome, these 3-8 mm thick, flowering whitish, DESCRIPTION: constricted and knobby with many old scars. Basal leaves absent broadly on ovate irregularly borne separately and singly. They are compound with 3 winged, leaflets stems-they 2-3.5" are (5-9 cm) long, the side leaflets asymmetrical, each leaflet on a short, near petiolule up to 20% of blade length. There are 2-4 major secondary veins emanating have base of the leaflet, light colored. slightly raised above and protruding below. Margins large, the round-tipped teeth with a light-colored nipple. Petioles rounded with a faint channel, rising 3-8" (8-20 sparse. cm) high. Stems 6-16" (15-40 cm) tall, solid, roundish, smooth, hairless, never branched, bearing only two leaves in an offset pair about on inch apart. Stem leaves smaller than the basal leaves with all leaflets sessile; the blades have tiny, scarcely visible hairs and the veins may be slightly depressed above. Petioles of stem leaves about 2" (5 cm) long, ascending, wing-channeled, rounded below. Inflorescence a raceme of 8-15, erect above the leaves, the peduncle naked for about 5" (13 cm), the pedicels about 1" (2.5 cm). Flowers 0.6" (15 mm) across with 4 blunt, white petals aging faintly pinkish. There are 4 green sepals with the tips curled in; the stamens are green. Fruit a thin cylindrical pod. HABITAT: Mature hardwood forests with well-drained, rich soil. Native. FOOD USE: Rhizomes can be used as a horseradish-like seasoning. Greens can be eaten in salads, sandwiches, etc., for their spicy flavor. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: This doesn't look much like cut-leaf toothwort at a glance, but the flavor is nearly identical. AKA Cardamine diphylla. 316 