BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE
1
Rumex acetosella 3 Polygonaceae (Buckwheat family)
Sheep sorrel
QUICK CHECK: Smooth, spoon shaped leaves with 2 small, right-angle lobes at the
base. ID difficulty 1.
Small perennial herb spreading by root suckers. Basal leaves in a rosette, tips
DESCRIPTION: long, spoon-shaped to ovate with rounded, blunt, or abruptly pointed the main
and 0.5-3" (1.3-8 blunt ear-like lobes jutting outward at the base, usually out of plane with in dry
two of the blade. (Smaller leaves lack these lobes.) Blades are often red-tinted
portion cold conditions. The surface is hairless and sparkles when held up in sunlight. Midvein faint and slightly
forward); these are flat above and protrude for a short distance on the underside. Veinlets are few, obscure,
depressed or above, protruding below. Four secondary veins arise near the base (2 running into the lobes, 2 running
faintly raised above and flat below. Margins entire. Petioles 70-140% of blade length, hairless, V-channeled,
the channel becoming deeper and winged toward the blade. Stems usually multiple; tough, wiry, solid, up to
20" (50 cm) tall and 2-4 mm thick, ridged, hairless, zigzag, jointed at the nodes with a ring that is often purple,
with a small sheath (often withering and falling off). Stem leaves alternate, much smaller and narrower than
basal leaves and on shorter petioles. Inflorescence a panicle encompassing the upper 35-50% of the plant,
each branch a raceme containing numerous flowers in small whorls. Flowers (early summer) with 6 green,
yellow, pink, or purple tepals. Seed (achene) 3-sided, 1-1.5 mm long, surrounded by valves about equally long.
HABITAT: Well-drained poor soil in full sun, especially sand or gravel. Sometimes also on rich, disturbed
sites, where it grows larger. Possibly introduced.
FOOD USE: Tender leaves, especially in spring and fall, can be used raw or cooked as an addition to salads,
soups, or sandwiches, or pureed into an excellent sauce or soup base. In poor soil the plants may be small
and coarse; leaves are best for eating on non-flowering plants with no red coloration, where the soil is moist
and rich. High in oxalic acid.
COMMENTS: This tenacious little plant is especially popular with children, who relish its sour flavor and
often teach each other to eat it.
318
Sheep somel flowers range from greenish to deep red.
(Images continued on the next page.)
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE 1 Rumex acetosella 3 Polygonaceae (Buckwheat family) Sheep sorrel QUICK CHECK: Smooth, spoon shaped leaves with 2 small, right-angle lobes at the base. ID difficulty 1. Small perennial herb spreading by root suckers. Basal leaves in a rosette, tips DESCRIPTION: long, spoon-shaped to ovate with rounded, blunt, or abruptly pointed the main and 0.5-3" (1.3-8 blunt ear-like lobes jutting outward at the base, usually out of plane with in dry two of the blade. (Smaller leaves lack these lobes.) Blades are often red-tinted portion cold conditions. The surface is hairless and sparkles when held up in sunlight. Midvein faint and slightly forward); these are flat above and protrude for a short distance on the underside. Veinlets are few, obscure, depressed or above, protruding below. Four secondary veins arise near the base (2 running into the lobes, 2 running faintly raised above and flat below. Margins entire. Petioles 70-140% of blade length, hairless, V-channeled, the channel becoming deeper and winged toward the blade. Stems usually multiple; tough, wiry, solid, up to 20" (50 cm) tall and 2-4 mm thick, ridged, hairless, zigzag, jointed at the nodes with a ring that is often purple, with a small sheath (often withering and falling off). Stem leaves alternate, much smaller and narrower than basal leaves and on shorter petioles. Inflorescence a panicle encompassing the upper 35-50% of the plant, each branch a raceme containing numerous flowers in small whorls. Flowers (early summer) with 6 green, yellow, pink, or purple tepals. Seed (achene) 3-sided, 1-1.5 mm long, surrounded by valves about equally long. HABITAT: Well-drained poor soil in full sun, especially sand or gravel. Sometimes also on rich, disturbed sites, where it grows larger. Possibly introduced. FOOD USE: Tender leaves, especially in spring and fall, can be used raw or cooked as an addition to salads, soups, or sandwiches, or pureed into an excellent sauce or soup base. In poor soil the plants may be small and coarse; leaves are best for eating on non-flowering plants with no red coloration, where the soil is moist and rich. High in oxalic acid. COMMENTS: This tenacious little plant is especially popular with children, who relish its sour flavor and often teach each other to eat it. 318 Sheep somel flowers range from greenish to deep red. (Images continued on the next page.) 