LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, ENTIRE
4
Lesser celandine
2
Ficaria verna Ranunculaceae (Buttercup family)
UICK CHECK: A spring carpet of small, heart shaped
Notch; bright yellow flowers rise above the leaves ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: all parts hairless. Perennial Tubers winter/spring ephemeral often forming
some spherical and one to several per plant, attached directly carpets to the over the ground.
is light brown, round, others elongated to 2" (5 cm), thickened at the rosette base
the base, glossy, smooth, the flesh white. Basal leaves in a rosette, mostly tips. The slein
heart-shaped, rubbery, to thin, soft, mostly flat but the lobes slightly ruffled. ground-hugging, The outer hear'-shand "
are or etched above and 1.5" (4 cm) long and almost as wide; inner leaves are smaller and leaves of each casolle
cold below; all major veins come from the base. There is a dark purple blotch rounder Veins in Red
during white dot. weather. Margins wavy, often gently scalloped but toothless, indented at /ein along the michan
the Petiole 120-150% of blade length, hollow with fleshy walls and a shallow groove tips, iften vite
outer leaves are broad and sheath-like in the lower fifth; those of the inner leaves have a on
sheath at the base. Stems 4-11" (10-28 cm) long, usually multiple, simple or with a few axillary narrow
Some stems hug the ground and are flattened, others are ascending or erect and more counded
case they are hollow, angled or grooved, smooth, and succulent. Bulblets are occasionally produced
Stem leaves sometimes arrowhead-shaped. They have 2 major veins from the base that reconveny
tip; the lower ones are paired, the upper alternate. Flowers (spring) borne singly on a hollow.
pedicel 1-5" (2.5-13 cm) long, rising above the leaves. Petals 7-10, thin, yellow. Sepals 3. shorterd
als, light green. Numerous anthers lie flat against the petals. There is a mound of short pistin
Fruit a ball of one-seeded, egg-shaped fruitlets.
HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in moderate shade. Mostly in urban parks, lawn margins, woodlets
floodplains. Introduced. I
FOOD USE: The tubers are small but abundant and can be eaten cooked. They are best collects
tops are dormant from late summer through winter. The young leaves can be eaten in spring but
acrid and should also be boiled and drained.
COMMENTS: This plant is highly invasive in rich, moist, high floodplains-our most edibie-rich
native plant communities. While it is edible, its food value doesn't come even remotely close to that of
edible species it displaces in any given woodland. Lesser celandine is abundant in some of our major arban
321
LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, ENTIRE 4 Lesser celandine 2 Ficaria verna Ranunculaceae (Buttercup family) UICK CHECK: A spring carpet of small, heart shaped Notch; bright yellow flowers rise above the leaves ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: all parts hairless. Perennial Tubers winter/spring ephemeral often forming some spherical and one to several per plant, attached directly carpets to the over the ground. is light brown, round, others elongated to 2" (5 cm), thickened at the rosette base the base, glossy, smooth, the flesh white. Basal leaves in a rosette, mostly tips. The slein heart-shaped, rubbery, to thin, soft, mostly flat but the lobes slightly ruffled. ground-hugging, The outer hear'-shand " are or etched above and 1.5" (4 cm) long and almost as wide; inner leaves are smaller and leaves of each casolle cold below; all major veins come from the base. There is a dark purple blotch rounder Veins in Red during white dot. weather. Margins wavy, often gently scalloped but toothless, indented at /ein along the michan the Petiole 120-150% of blade length, hollow with fleshy walls and a shallow groove tips, iften vite outer leaves are broad and sheath-like in the lower fifth; those of the inner leaves have a on sheath at the base. Stems 4-11" (10-28 cm) long, usually multiple, simple or with a few axillary narrow Some stems hug the ground and are flattened, others are ascending or erect and more counded case they are hollow, angled or grooved, smooth, and succulent. Bulblets are occasionally produced Stem leaves sometimes arrowhead-shaped. They have 2 major veins from the base that reconveny tip; the lower ones are paired, the upper alternate. Flowers (spring) borne singly on a hollow. pedicel 1-5" (2.5-13 cm) long, rising above the leaves. Petals 7-10, thin, yellow. Sepals 3. shorterd als, light green. Numerous anthers lie flat against the petals. There is a mound of short pistin Fruit a ball of one-seeded, egg-shaped fruitlets. HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in moderate shade. Mostly in urban parks, lawn margins, woodlets floodplains. Introduced. I FOOD USE: The tubers are small but abundant and can be eaten cooked. They are best collects tops are dormant from late summer through winter. The young leaves can be eaten in spring but acrid and should also be boiled and drained. COMMENTS: This plant is highly invasive in rich, moist, high floodplains-our most edibie-rich native plant communities. While it is edible, its food value doesn't come even remotely close to that of edible species it displaces in any given woodland. Lesser celandine is abundant in some of our major arban 321 