BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
3
Rumex Sorrel acetosa 3 Polygonaceae (Buckwheat family)
Brittle. tender, hairless leaves with flat to raised veins difficulty and two 1. reflexed
lobes QUICK on the NECK. leaf bases; large panicles of tiny red-green flowers. ID
Perennial. Basal leaves in a rosette, long-lanceolate, 3-8" (8-20 hairless, cm)
DESCRIPTION: (2.5-6 cm) wide, blunt-pointed at the tip, thick, tender, brittle, Midvein flat to
long and leaves 1-2.4" with 2 pointed, backward lobes at the base. Margins are entire. evident,
slightly protruding below. Petioles of basal leaves 1-4 times the blade length, broadly triangular cm) to tall, D-shaped erect
many raised above, protruding below. Secondary veins flat above, scarcely
with slightly shallowly channeled top, hairless, solid. Stems few to several per plant, 20-44" (50-112 with small to
slightly a leaning, unbranched below the inflorescence, 5-10 mm thick, ridged, hairless, solid, a sheath
at the nodes. Stem leaves few, alternate, reduced, sessile. Inflorescence an elongated panicle comprising the
top third to half of the stem, the branches at narrow angles, branching once again, the smallest branchlets
1-2.4" (2.5-6 cm) long. Flowers (early summer, some again in fall) numerous, tiny and unshowy, spaced along
branches, hanging on very short, thin pedicels. Seed (achene) tiny, 3-sided, enclosed by 3 folded, round to
heart-shaped, papery, green to pinkish, veiny valves, each with a prominent central vein that is sometimes
inflated near the base.
HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny soil, especially sand or gravel. Mostly roadsides
and fields. Native, but most populations encountered are outside the native
range and introduced (as with chives).
FOOD USE: Tender leaves are excellent in salad, soup, or stir fry. Basal leaves
are best, and are available in spring or early summer, then again in late summer
or autumn. High in oxalic acid. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is the same species as garden sorrel. It is like a giant and better
version of sheep sorrel. Delicious but erratic in occurrence, it is locally abundant
in some regions, including near Bemidji, Minnesota and the city of Quebec.
seo
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, 3 Rumex Sorrel acetosa 3 Polygonaceae (Buckwheat family) Brittle. tender, hairless leaves with flat to raised veins difficulty and two 1. reflexed lobes QUICK on the NECK. leaf bases; large panicles of tiny red-green flowers. ID Perennial. Basal leaves in a rosette, long-lanceolate, 3-8" (8-20 hairless, cm) DESCRIPTION: (2.5-6 cm) wide, blunt-pointed at the tip, thick, tender, brittle, Midvein flat to long and leaves 1-2.4" with 2 pointed, backward lobes at the base. Margins are entire. evident, slightly protruding below. Petioles of basal leaves 1-4 times the blade length, broadly triangular cm) to tall, D-shaped erect many raised above, protruding below. Secondary veins flat above, scarcely with slightly shallowly channeled top, hairless, solid. Stems few to several per plant, 20-44" (50-112 with small to slightly a leaning, unbranched below the inflorescence, 5-10 mm thick, ridged, hairless, solid, a sheath at the nodes. Stem leaves few, alternate, reduced, sessile. Inflorescence an elongated panicle comprising the top third to half of the stem, the branches at narrow angles, branching once again, the smallest branchlets 1-2.4" (2.5-6 cm) long. Flowers (early summer, some again in fall) numerous, tiny and unshowy, spaced along branches, hanging on very short, thin pedicels. Seed (achene) tiny, 3-sided, enclosed by 3 folded, round to heart-shaped, papery, green to pinkish, veiny valves, each with a prominent central vein that is sometimes inflated near the base. HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny soil, especially sand or gravel. Mostly roadsides and fields. Native, but most populations encountered are outside the native range and introduced (as with chives). FOOD USE: Tender leaves are excellent in salad, soup, or stir fry. Basal leaves are best, and are available in spring or early summer, then again in late summer or autumn. High in oxalic acid. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is the same species as garden sorrel. It is like a giant and better version of sheep sorrel. Delicious but erratic in occurrence, it is locally abundant in some regions, including near Bemidji, Minnesota and the city of Quebec. seo 