22
2
5
Alpine Bistorta bistort vivipara FATHER Polygonaceae 1 2 (Buckwheat family)
CHECK: Erect, unbranched, shin-high herb with entire, long-lanceolate 1. leaves
QUICK a single spike of tiny white flowers OF bulblets. ID difficulty
and herb. Rhizome 7-10 mm thick and 0.6-1.5" (15-38 with mm) layers long, of
DESCRIPTION: Perennial shape, dark brown and rough on the outside, covered truncated and
curved into a J or sheaths; U whitish inside. The back end of the rhizome wither is by flower-
old. dark, papery to die as the tip grows. Basal leaves, which mostly above,
black-it appears cm) long, lance-elliptic, sharp-tipped, hairless and green gray-green protruding and remarkably minutely
ing, are below, 1-3" (2.5-8 the margins entire, strongly scrolled downward. Midvein depressed above, of blade
hairy with the color offset green or red; other veins not evident. Petioles narrow, channeled, and 30-200%
below (longer in competition), with a large sheath at the base. Stems 5-17" (13-43 cm) tall and 2-3 mm thick,
erect, length single or clumped, unbranched, solid, hairless, a mixture of green and maroon, bulged sheathed at
the jointed nodes. Stem leaves 2-4, alternate, held vertical and nearly appressed to the stem. Lower stem leaves
have petioles, but upper ones are sessile. Inflorescence a single, erect, densely packed terminal spike-like
raceme 1-2.5" (2.5-4 cm) long. Flowers (mid to late summer) white to pink, 3-6 mm long with 4-6 (usually 5)
tepals and 8 stamens which sometimes protrude (if they do, the anthers are purple). Most flowers produce
dry, semi-hard bulblets 4-5 mm long, shaped like popcorn with a pointed tip, smooth and brown in the lower
2/3, the distal third green with a leafy sheath. Fruits are rarely produced; I've never seen one.
HABITAT: Moist tundra and alpine meadows. Native.
FOOD USE: The rhizomes can be eaten after boiling but are rather astringent. The young, tender leaves
are slightly tangy and taste good raw or cooked. Mature bulblets can be stripped off by hand in late summer
and eaten raw, parched and ground into meal, fried, or toasted; they are starchy with a pleasant nutty flavor.
Conservation 3/1/1.
COMMENTS: One of the best edible plants to know in the Far North, with multiple edible parts. The bulblets
are an important food for ptarmigan. AKA Polygonum viviparum, Persicaria vivipara.
322
22 2 5 Alpine Bistorta bistort vivipara FATHER Polygonaceae 1 2 (Buckwheat family) CHECK: Erect, unbranched, shin-high herb with entire, long-lanceolate 1. leaves QUICK a single spike of tiny white flowers OF bulblets. ID difficulty and herb. Rhizome 7-10 mm thick and 0.6-1.5" (15-38 with mm) layers long, of DESCRIPTION: Perennial shape, dark brown and rough on the outside, covered truncated and curved into a J or sheaths; U whitish inside. The back end of the rhizome wither is by flower- old. dark, papery to die as the tip grows. Basal leaves, which mostly above, black-it appears cm) long, lance-elliptic, sharp-tipped, hairless and green gray-green protruding and remarkably minutely ing, are below, 1-3" (2.5-8 the margins entire, strongly scrolled downward. Midvein depressed above, of blade hairy with the color offset green or red; other veins not evident. Petioles narrow, channeled, and 30-200% below (longer in competition), with a large sheath at the base. Stems 5-17" (13-43 cm) tall and 2-3 mm thick, erect, length single or clumped, unbranched, solid, hairless, a mixture of green and maroon, bulged sheathed at the jointed nodes. Stem leaves 2-4, alternate, held vertical and nearly appressed to the stem. Lower stem leaves have petioles, but upper ones are sessile. Inflorescence a single, erect, densely packed terminal spike-like raceme 1-2.5" (2.5-4 cm) long. Flowers (mid to late summer) white to pink, 3-6 mm long with 4-6 (usually 5) tepals and 8 stamens which sometimes protrude (if they do, the anthers are purple). Most flowers produce dry, semi-hard bulblets 4-5 mm long, shaped like popcorn with a pointed tip, smooth and brown in the lower 2/3, the distal third green with a leafy sheath. Fruits are rarely produced; I've never seen one. HABITAT: Moist tundra and alpine meadows. Native. FOOD USE: The rhizomes can be eaten after boiling but are rather astringent. The young, tender leaves are slightly tangy and taste good raw or cooked. Mature bulblets can be stripped off by hand in late summer and eaten raw, parched and ground into meal, fried, or toasted; they are starchy with a pleasant nutty flavor. Conservation 3/1/1. COMMENTS: One of the best edible plants to know in the Far North, with multiple edible parts. The bulblets are an important food for ptarmigan. AKA Polygonum viviparum, Persicaria vivipara. 322 