BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, ENTIRE
DOCK
E
NG-226
genus
Rumex
(in
part)
Polygonaceae
(Buckwheat
QUICK of unshowy CHECK: flowers Rosette and brown of large papery entire valves leaves; enclosing stems jointed 3-sided and fruits. sheathed ID difficulty at the family) andas: large
COLLECTIVE heart-shaped to DESCRIPTION: lanceolate Perennials from taproots, the mature form taller 1.
noodles (crisped). or almost linear, 4-20" (10-50 cm) long, hairless, than wide. Basal leaves several,
center. Secondary veins Midvein thick, not depressed, lined lengthwise, usually with often a small ruffled raised or wavy like lasagna
up before reaching the pinnate, numerous, broadly angled, variably depressed, arching for ward ridge or down the
solid, hairless in margin. Margins often minutely wavy but not toothed. Petioles breaking
petiole base is most species, D-shaped in cross section, the top flat and not channeled, 15-70% lined len of blade length.
slime when wrapped in a large sheath (ocrea), that is thin and membrane-like, partly translucent gthwise. and The
young; older sheaths dry and become papery-brittle. Stems multiple, zigzag, ridged, holding
less, jointed at the nodes with an encircling ring and usually a bulge, wrapped in a papery or membrane-like mostly sheath hair-
above each node, solid, unbranched except for strongly ascending inflorescence branches. Stem leaves alternate
similar to basal leaves but progressively smaller with shorter petioles. Inflorescence a large branched cluster
of hundreds of flowers hanging from thread-thin pedicels in numerous tiny whorls in the upper half of the
plant, sometimes with reduced leaves interspersed. Flowers (early summer) tiny with 6 tepals of 2 different
sizes, reddish or green. Seed (achene) three-sided (like buckwheat), surrounded by three papery wings
valves. The middle of each valve on many species holds a small rounded or teardrop-shaped growth care
tubercle. Tubercle and valve features help distinguish the species. The valves and fruits turn dark brown
are very noticeable in early summer.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Horseradish (p. 344) and prairie-dock (p. 353) leaves resemble dock's at 3 glar
but both have small teeth; the flowering parts are very different.
HABITAT: Moist soil in sunny or lightly shaded, disturbed localities: agricultural fields, roadsides, gardens
empty lots, barnyards. Some species are found in alpine meadows, marshes, floodplains, and woodland
openings. There are native and introduced species.
FOOD USE: Young leaves are best cooked. They should still be scrolled or folded, or have obvious creases
where they have just unfolded. Young petioles can be used as a vegetable like rhubarb, and the milde: ones
are good raw. Peel young stems to reveal a tender interior that is good raw or cooked. Mature seeds can also
be separated from their chaff and used as a grain, but generally they are too bitter to be palatable and must
be leached.
COMMENTS: Docks are common and have several edible parts. Their flavor is tangy and somewhat astringent; have
it is variable from plant to another even within species. Some people report eating dock roots. but food-it
found them too strong one to be food. In foraging circles it is common to eat dock chaff, but this is not a
is added roughage like bran that modifies flavor and texture but reduces food value.
to identify as a group but can be hard to tell from one another. One I have common included spe-
SPECIES: Docks are easy R. triangulivalvis, lacks a basal rosette and can be found in group and is 35. sometimes eaten
cies, willow-leaved dock its low food quality, because it is so commonly encountered tend to be quite bitter.
bitter There dock are additional here, despite good, edible docks in our region, but our large wetland species
crispus
2
2
2
6 Curly dock
Rumex
This very common, weedy,
introduced dock is the most
abundant species in many
areas. It likes disturbed ground
and moist soil in full to partial
sun. Its leaves are long and nar-
row with crisped much so). edges The (some- stems stand tubercles in
times very smooth-edged with most com-
tall. Valves are each fruit. This is the page.)
different monly eaten sizes dock. on (Continued on the next 323
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, ENTIRE DOCK E NG-226 genus Rumex (in part) Polygonaceae (Buckwheat QUICK of unshowy CHECK: flowers Rosette and brown of large papery entire valves leaves; enclosing stems jointed 3-sided and fruits. sheathed ID difficulty at the family) andas: large COLLECTIVE heart-shaped to DESCRIPTION: lanceolate Perennials from taproots, the mature form taller 1. noodles (crisped). or almost linear, 4-20" (10-50 cm) long, hairless, than wide. Basal leaves several, center. Secondary veins Midvein thick, not depressed, lined lengthwise, usually with often a small ruffled raised or wavy like lasagna up before reaching the pinnate, numerous, broadly angled, variably depressed, arching for ward ridge or down the solid, hairless in margin. Margins often minutely wavy but not toothed. Petioles breaking petiole base is most species, D-shaped in cross section, the top flat and not channeled, 15-70% lined len of blade length. slime when wrapped in a large sheath (ocrea), that is thin and membrane-like, partly translucent gthwise. and The young; older sheaths dry and become papery-brittle. Stems multiple, zigzag, ridged, holding less, jointed at the nodes with an encircling ring and usually a bulge, wrapped in a papery or membrane-like mostly sheath hair- above each node, solid, unbranched except for strongly ascending inflorescence branches. Stem leaves alternate similar to basal leaves but progressively smaller with shorter petioles. Inflorescence a large branched cluster of hundreds of flowers hanging from thread-thin pedicels in numerous tiny whorls in the upper half of the plant, sometimes with reduced leaves interspersed. Flowers (early summer) tiny with 6 tepals of 2 different sizes, reddish or green. Seed (achene) three-sided (like buckwheat), surrounded by three papery wings valves. The middle of each valve on many species holds a small rounded or teardrop-shaped growth care tubercle. Tubercle and valve features help distinguish the species. The valves and fruits turn dark brown are very noticeable in early summer. CONFUSING PLANTS: Horseradish (p. 344) and prairie-dock (p. 353) leaves resemble dock's at 3 glar but both have small teeth; the flowering parts are very different. HABITAT: Moist soil in sunny or lightly shaded, disturbed localities: agricultural fields, roadsides, gardens empty lots, barnyards. Some species are found in alpine meadows, marshes, floodplains, and woodland openings. There are native and introduced species. FOOD USE: Young leaves are best cooked. They should still be scrolled or folded, or have obvious creases where they have just unfolded. Young petioles can be used as a vegetable like rhubarb, and the milde: ones are good raw. Peel young stems to reveal a tender interior that is good raw or cooked. Mature seeds can also be separated from their chaff and used as a grain, but generally they are too bitter to be palatable and must be leached. COMMENTS: Docks are common and have several edible parts. Their flavor is tangy and somewhat astringent; have it is variable from plant to another even within species. Some people report eating dock roots. but food-it found them too strong one to be food. In foraging circles it is common to eat dock chaff, but this is not a is added roughage like bran that modifies flavor and texture but reduces food value. to identify as a group but can be hard to tell from one another. One I have common included spe- SPECIES: Docks are easy R. triangulivalvis, lacks a basal rosette and can be found in group and is 35. sometimes eaten cies, willow-leaved dock its low food quality, because it is so commonly encountered tend to be quite bitter. bitter There dock are additional here, despite good, edible docks in our region, but our large wetland species crispus 2 2 2 6 Curly dock Rumex This very common, weedy, introduced dock is the most abundant species in many areas. It likes disturbed ground and moist soil in full to partial sun. Its leaves are long and nar- row with crisped much so). edges The (some- stems stand tubercles in times very smooth-edged with most com- tall. Valves are each fruit. This is the page.) different monly eaten sizes dock. on (Continued on the next 323 