ISENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, ENTIRE
8
Golden dock Rumex fueginus
3
This along is major a native rivers species, in late primarily of mudflats, that often comes
nooth with no summer to autumn when waters recede up The in huge colonic
depressed veins and smaller than those of other docks, rarely leaves are eeding 199
9" (23 cm). They are thin, extremely risped
full sun and flat in competition. The petioles are
faintly hairy. Basal leaves disappear by flower-
ing. Stems are usually single The flowers are
golden in the center. The valves consist of 3-5 long bristles, each
one with a claw-like tubercle. The tender leaves of this dock are
among the best eating, and they occur at a time when other docks
are long past their edible stage. The stems, however, are too small
to bother with. AKAR. maritimus.
9 Patience dock Rumex patientia
3
3
3
1
This species is also called monk's rhubarb. It was formerly cultivated as a vegetable and is
the premiere dock for
eating. Widespread
but sporadic in occur-
rence, it is very abun-
dant in some areas. It
likes well-drained rich soil in full to partia
sun. Patience dock has broader and much
larger leaves than most docks and stypi-
cally 5-8' (1.5-2.5 m) tall at maturity, with
deep purple stems. The valves are broad
and rounded with just one small tubercle
also often encounter "false patience dock
with similarly broad but slightly smaller and
rougher leaves, and more than one tubercle
These may be hybrids between patience
dock and curly dock, or they may be R. cr's-
tata, which is so similar to patience dock
that it is often lumped with it in herbarium
collections. These impostors are eaible
Patience dock fruiting.
just not as good as the real thing.
Young patience dock greens.
10 Bitter dock
Rumex
obtusifolius
1
2
This species has broad, heart-shaped basalleaves veins.
reticulated with a network of depressed but
leaves are narrower than basal ones The
Stem still broader than those of most other tubercles. docks. This
moist. valves introduced have wooded species long situations teeth is very stems and along narrow common, are usually forest especially roads very bitter: and III broad-leat 00 casionally dock they
trails. are mild The enough leaves for and me to almost like them. AKA
325
Bitter dock rosette
ISENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, ENTIRE 8 Golden dock Rumex fueginus 3 This along is major a native rivers species, in late primarily of mudflats, that often comes nooth with no summer to autumn when waters recede up The in huge colonic depressed veins and smaller than those of other docks, rarely leaves are eeding 199 9" (23 cm). They are thin, extremely risped full sun and flat in competition. The petioles are faintly hairy. Basal leaves disappear by flower- ing. Stems are usually single The flowers are golden in the center. The valves consist of 3-5 long bristles, each one with a claw-like tubercle. The tender leaves of this dock are among the best eating, and they occur at a time when other docks are long past their edible stage. The stems, however, are too small to bother with. AKAR. maritimus. 9 Patience dock Rumex patientia 3 3 3 1 This species is also called monk's rhubarb. It was formerly cultivated as a vegetable and is the premiere dock for eating. Widespread but sporadic in occur- rence, it is very abun- dant in some areas. It likes well-drained rich soil in full to partia sun. Patience dock has broader and much larger leaves than most docks and stypi- cally 5-8' (1.5-2.5 m) tall at maturity, with deep purple stems. The valves are broad and rounded with just one small tubercle also often encounter "false patience dock with similarly broad but slightly smaller and rougher leaves, and more than one tubercle These may be hybrids between patience dock and curly dock, or they may be R. cr's- tata, which is so similar to patience dock that it is often lumped with it in herbarium collections. These impostors are eaible Patience dock fruiting. just not as good as the real thing. Young patience dock greens. 10 Bitter dock Rumex obtusifolius 1 2 This species has broad, heart-shaped basalleaves veins. reticulated with a network of depressed but leaves are narrower than basal ones The Stem still broader than those of most other tubercles. docks. This moist. valves introduced have wooded species long situations teeth is very stems and along narrow common, are usually forest especially roads very bitter: and III broad-leat 00 casionally dock they trails. are mild The enough leaves for and me to almost like them. AKA 325 Bitter dock rosette 