BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE:
11 bluebells
Mertensia Virginia virginica Boraginaceae 2 (Borage family)
erect leaves with rounded tips, all parts leaning smooth to one and
hairless QUICK NECK: dirsten Delicate, of bell-like elliptic, blue flowers with a tubular base, mostly
side. ID difficulty 1.
Perennial spring ephemeral often growing in multi-crowned flowering clumps plants and
DESCRIPTION: Non-flowering plants have rosettes of several large leaves; leaves 2-4 per rosette,
have smaller thin and delicate, hairless, smooth, rubbery and flexible Secondary light green, veins broadly 3-5
large colonies basal leaves, which may wither during blooming. Basal when young,
4-8" (10-20 rounded cm) at long, the tip, abruptly tapered at the base, held erect. Midvein depressed. are mostly obscure and flat
elliptic. midvein, depressed above and projecting below. Veinlets shortening to
per side, 45° to Petioles the broadly wing-channeled, to 70% of the blade length on basal leaves, smooth and
on both sides. the uppermost leaves. Stems 14-28" (36-70 cm) tall, often purplish (especially early), but a
hairless, sessile on slightly glaucous, fleshy and fragile. In cross section they are roundish, solid at first developing the
small hollow when older, with several angles-some of the angles winged or with sharp ridges (but ridges
running down from the leaves are flat-topped). The ridges are often distally lighter and greener than the rest
of the stem. Stem leaves alternate, similar to the basal but progressively smaller, crowded and overlapping,
the uppermost pointed. Inflorescence multiple packed clusters, terminal or from upper leaf axils, leaning
mostly to one side. Flowers (spring) showy, blue (rarely pink), drooping or nodding, about 0.8" (2 cm) long.
The corolla is a shimmery purple tube for a little over half of its length; after this it abruptly spreads into a
blue cup or bell with 5 crimped depressions and 5 shallow, scarcely distinguishable lobes. There are 5 small,
green, elongated, recurved, blunt-tipped sepals at the base. Fruit a 4-seeded capsule.
HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in hardwood forests, especially in valleys and floodplains. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather the young leaves in spring before the plants flower, or just as they are beginning to flower.
Eat raw or cooked; they are extremely tender but somewhat bitter. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This is one of our most beloved spring wildflowers, and it is often planted ornamentally inside
and outside of its natural distribution, but the flavor is mediocre in my opinion.
326
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE: 11 bluebells Mertensia Virginia virginica Boraginaceae 2 (Borage family) erect leaves with rounded tips, all parts leaning smooth to one and hairless QUICK NECK: dirsten Delicate, of bell-like elliptic, blue flowers with a tubular base, mostly side. ID difficulty 1. Perennial spring ephemeral often growing in multi-crowned flowering clumps plants and DESCRIPTION: Non-flowering plants have rosettes of several large leaves; leaves 2-4 per rosette, have smaller thin and delicate, hairless, smooth, rubbery and flexible Secondary light green, veins broadly 3-5 large colonies basal leaves, which may wither during blooming. Basal when young, 4-8" (10-20 rounded cm) at long, the tip, abruptly tapered at the base, held erect. Midvein depressed. are mostly obscure and flat elliptic. midvein, depressed above and projecting below. Veinlets shortening to per side, 45° to Petioles the broadly wing-channeled, to 70% of the blade length on basal leaves, smooth and on both sides. the uppermost leaves. Stems 14-28" (36-70 cm) tall, often purplish (especially early), but a hairless, sessile on slightly glaucous, fleshy and fragile. In cross section they are roundish, solid at first developing the small hollow when older, with several angles-some of the angles winged or with sharp ridges (but ridges running down from the leaves are flat-topped). The ridges are often distally lighter and greener than the rest of the stem. Stem leaves alternate, similar to the basal but progressively smaller, crowded and overlapping, the uppermost pointed. Inflorescence multiple packed clusters, terminal or from upper leaf axils, leaning mostly to one side. Flowers (spring) showy, blue (rarely pink), drooping or nodding, about 0.8" (2 cm) long. The corolla is a shimmery purple tube for a little over half of its length; after this it abruptly spreads into a blue cup or bell with 5 crimped depressions and 5 shallow, scarcely distinguishable lobes. There are 5 small, green, elongated, recurved, blunt-tipped sepals at the base. Fruit a 4-seeded capsule. HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in hardwood forests, especially in valleys and floodplains. Native. FOOD USE: Gather the young leaves in spring before the plants flower, or just as they are beginning to flower. Eat raw or cooked; they are extremely tender but somewhat bitter. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This is one of our most beloved spring wildflowers, and it is often planted ornamentally inside and outside of its natural distribution, but the flavor is mediocre in my opinion. 326 