orage fami
STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, ENTIRE
12 Northern bluebells
2
Mertensia paniculata
Boraginaceae
IICK CHECK: panicles Hairy, large, entire leaves with depressed and family)
(Borage
drooping of blue, bell-like flowers. ID difficulty 3.
DESCRIPTION: leaves to 8" (20 Perennial, not ephemeral, with one to several stems from
to abruptly up cm) long, broadly ovate, entire, the tip pointed, the base the base. Basal
smaller hairs angled. Blades are rough-hairy below; the upper surface is heart-shaped
above, pointing toward the tip. Midvein light colored and very deeply bumpy and has
above. protruding Veinlets below. Secondary veins few, arching toward the leaf tip, deeply depressed
bubbly blistered depressed to flat. Petioles about equal to the blade, broad, thin, depressed shallowly
a Stems one or to look inside the channel; they can be hairy (especially on the margins) 1j to channeled with
several per clump, 22-42" (56-107 cm) tall, unbranched below the inflorescence, near cless
nodes. ing, sparsely hairy, with a small hollow in the center, the surface with double ridges running down erect from in
Stem leaves alternate, narrower, up to 6" (15 cm) long. The petioles are winged and get shorter the
up the stem; uppermost leaves are sessile. There are small, paired leaves in the upper branches near the going
Inflorescence a drooping panicle of 3-18 at the top of the stem, the branches repeatedly forking Flowers owers acce
0.6" (1.5 cm) long with a blue, bell-like corolla with 5 shallow lobes. The calyx has 5 long, pointed. harry COME
much shorter than the corolla. Flower buds are pinkish. Fruit a 4-seeded capsule.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Northern wild comfrey Cynoglossum boreale has blunt-tipped lower leaver
with down-curled edges, and the upper ones clasp the stem. The secondary veins are more broad
and less depressed. There are no leaves in the inflorescence or on the upper stalk, and the flower tubes
shorter and spread more widely.
HABITAT: Lightly shaded, moist slopes in boreal forests, especially under birches where rocky. Native
FOOD USE: The tender spring greens make a nice salad green or potherb. Leaves persisting through survice
remain tender enough to eat. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: The taste of northern bluebell's greens is a little better than that of Virginia bluebel., and they
are available for much longer. This species is more characteristic of the Mountain West. AKA chiming bel's
mountain bluebells, tall lungwort, tall bluebells.
327
orage fami STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, ENTIRE 12 Northern bluebells 2 Mertensia paniculata Boraginaceae IICK CHECK: panicles Hairy, large, entire leaves with depressed and family) (Borage drooping of blue, bell-like flowers. ID difficulty 3. DESCRIPTION: leaves to 8" (20 Perennial, not ephemeral, with one to several stems from to abruptly up cm) long, broadly ovate, entire, the tip pointed, the base the base. Basal smaller hairs angled. Blades are rough-hairy below; the upper surface is heart-shaped above, pointing toward the tip. Midvein light colored and very deeply bumpy and has above. protruding Veinlets below. Secondary veins few, arching toward the leaf tip, deeply depressed bubbly blistered depressed to flat. Petioles about equal to the blade, broad, thin, depressed shallowly a Stems one or to look inside the channel; they can be hairy (especially on the margins) 1j to channeled with several per clump, 22-42" (56-107 cm) tall, unbranched below the inflorescence, near cless nodes. ing, sparsely hairy, with a small hollow in the center, the surface with double ridges running down erect from in Stem leaves alternate, narrower, up to 6" (15 cm) long. The petioles are winged and get shorter the up the stem; uppermost leaves are sessile. There are small, paired leaves in the upper branches near the going Inflorescence a drooping panicle of 3-18 at the top of the stem, the branches repeatedly forking Flowers owers acce 0.6" (1.5 cm) long with a blue, bell-like corolla with 5 shallow lobes. The calyx has 5 long, pointed. harry COME much shorter than the corolla. Flower buds are pinkish. Fruit a 4-seeded capsule. CONFUSING PLANTS: Northern wild comfrey Cynoglossum boreale has blunt-tipped lower leaver with down-curled edges, and the upper ones clasp the stem. The secondary veins are more broad and less depressed. There are no leaves in the inflorescence or on the upper stalk, and the flower tubes shorter and spread more widely. HABITAT: Lightly shaded, moist slopes in boreal forests, especially under birches where rocky. Native FOOD USE: The tender spring greens make a nice salad green or potherb. Leaves persisting through survice remain tender enough to eat. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: The taste of northern bluebell's greens is a little better than that of Virginia bluebel., and they are available for much longer. This species is more characteristic of the Mountain West. AKA chiming bel's mountain bluebells, tall lungwort, tall bluebells. 327 