AVES ALTERNATE, ENTIRE.
BASAL
13 Seaside bluebells
Mertensia maritima Boraginaceae 2 (Borage family)
CHECK: Creeping bluish-gray plant of seashores flowers. with broad, ID difficulty smooth, 1.
QUICK hairless, succulent leaves and small, blue, bell-like on
entire, Perennial, not spreading by rhizome. Rosettes are only elliptic, evident 2.5-4"
DESCRIPTION: with small or no stems. Basal leaves ovate to broadly The blades are
young plants the tip abruptly pointed and often downturned. above,
(6-10 cm) long, and succulent, smooth, hairless with scattered dark gland-dots depressed
thick, soft and coated with a very heavy bloom. Major veins slightly (76 cm)
above. Margins decumbent, rising to 8" (20 cm) high, solid, hairless, glaucous, smooth remain except unbranched for small ridges until
bluish gray, entire, often wavy. Stems single to many, creeping, to 30"
long, the down tips from the nodes, often purple on the sunny side. Crowded stems often have numerous
running the single stems often branch broadly beginning near the base. Large plants may crowded and
near radiating tip: symmetrically to form a circular carpet across the beach. Stem leaves alternate,
overlapping, stems broadly ovate to obovate or spatulate, 0.8-2.5" (2-6 cm) long; the bases narrow to winged peti-
oles that range from nearly sessile to 100% of blade length. Veins not depressed and scarcely visible-even the
midvein is inconspicuous. Inflorescence small, compact, terminal clusters crowded by paired leaves. Flowers
(late summer) 6-10 mm long, blue or occasionally pink, bell-like, with 5 shallow lobes spreading slightly at
the end of a tapered tube. There are 5 triangular sepals much shorter than the tube. Fruit a 4 seeded capsule;
pedicels get much longer in fruit.
HABITAT: Gravelly, sandy, or pebbly
ocean shores. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender leaves and stem
tips can be eaten raw or cooked. Con-
servation 2.
COMMENTS: This wild arctic deli-
cacy unfortunately comes south only
to northern New England. In Alaska
and Canada it is well-known and highly
appreciated among foragers. It is tra-
ditionally chopped and fermented with
other seashore vegetables for winter
storage. AKA oyster leaf. This name
refers to the rich, satisfying flavor of
the greens, which some people liken to
that of oysters. (I find the comparison
a stretch.) The flavor is actually very
similar to Virginia bluebells, but milder
and a bit salty.
328
AVES ALTERNATE, ENTIRE. BASAL 13 Seaside bluebells Mertensia maritima Boraginaceae 2 (Borage family) CHECK: Creeping bluish-gray plant of seashores flowers. with broad, ID difficulty smooth, 1. QUICK hairless, succulent leaves and small, blue, bell-like on entire, Perennial, not spreading by rhizome. Rosettes are only elliptic, evident 2.5-4" DESCRIPTION: with small or no stems. Basal leaves ovate to broadly The blades are young plants the tip abruptly pointed and often downturned. above, (6-10 cm) long, and succulent, smooth, hairless with scattered dark gland-dots depressed thick, soft and coated with a very heavy bloom. Major veins slightly (76 cm) above. Margins decumbent, rising to 8" (20 cm) high, solid, hairless, glaucous, smooth remain except unbranched for small ridges until bluish gray, entire, often wavy. Stems single to many, creeping, to 30" long, the down tips from the nodes, often purple on the sunny side. Crowded stems often have numerous running the single stems often branch broadly beginning near the base. Large plants may crowded and near radiating tip: symmetrically to form a circular carpet across the beach. Stem leaves alternate, overlapping, stems broadly ovate to obovate or spatulate, 0.8-2.5" (2-6 cm) long; the bases narrow to winged peti- oles that range from nearly sessile to 100% of blade length. Veins not depressed and scarcely visible-even the midvein is inconspicuous. Inflorescence small, compact, terminal clusters crowded by paired leaves. Flowers (late summer) 6-10 mm long, blue or occasionally pink, bell-like, with 5 shallow lobes spreading slightly at the end of a tapered tube. There are 5 triangular sepals much shorter than the tube. Fruit a 4 seeded capsule; pedicels get much longer in fruit. HABITAT: Gravelly, sandy, or pebbly ocean shores. Native. FOOD USE: Tender leaves and stem tips can be eaten raw or cooked. Con- servation 2. COMMENTS: This wild arctic deli- cacy unfortunately comes south only to northern New England. In Alaska and Canada it is well-known and highly appreciated among foragers. It is tra- ditionally chopped and fermented with other seashore vegetables for winter storage. AKA oyster leaf. This name refers to the rich, satisfying flavor of the greens, which some people liken to that of oysters. (I find the comparison a stretch.) The flavor is actually very similar to Virginia bluebells, but milder and a bit salty. 328 