BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, ENTIRE
14 Seaside goldenrod
Solidago sempervirens Asteraceae (Composite family)
UCK erect CHECK: stems with Large, narrow, entire, erect, evergreen leaves crawded
tall, lanceolate leaves; clusters of small yellow flower heads near ID difficulty the of 2.
DESCRIPTION: Basal leaves Perennial evergreen spreading by short rhizomes to form multiple
crowns. lanceolate in two-ranked clumps, to 14" (36 cm) long, erect or ascending, adjacent
with a tapered tip and base. Blades glossy, smooth, thick, hairless, flat, linear-
silvery below when mature. Midvein offset by light color, deeply depressed above entire,
the leaf base but weakly depressed distally, protruding with a blunt keel on the underside. near
Veins and veinlets are flat on both sides; a few secondary veins at very low angles of 10-15° run for
blade length (almost parallel). Petioles of basal leaves 20-40% of blade length, deeply channeled. nested much of the
the base, the edges with broad, sharp, green wings gently broadening into the leaf. Stems 3-8 near tall
unbranched below the inflorescence, smooth, roundish or sometimes slightly flattened (especially near basel.
faintly ridged, hairless or with faint hairs following the ridges. Stem leaves somewhat
smaller than the basal (much smaller in the inflorescence), alternate, tapered and deeply
folded at the base, without a clear petiole; their broad bases clasp the stem. Inflores-
cence a terminal panicle with many raceme-like branches, the branches erect, scarcely
diverging from the main stalk, the heads numerous, crowded, tending toward one side.
Heads yellow, 1 cm or more long, with ray and disk florets. LYDS prominent and stiff.
HABITAT: Sunny, disturbed areas along the ocean (occasionally inland), especially
where organic matter and moisture collect, ranging from dunes to marsh edges. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender young leaves, and the shoots after peeling, can be eaten raw or
cooked. The season of availability is long, especially in the South. Leaves can be used
for tea. They are aromatic like other goldenrods but much more substantial and not as
strong. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: I'm not keen on eating goldenrod greens, but this is perhaps the best of
a mediocre group, if for no reason other than it's size, succulence, and faint saltiness.
Seaside goldenrod is divided into two species by some taxonomists, in which case the
southern form, more characteristic of marshes and having smaller flower heads, is
called S. mexicana. I have eaten both, but not enough to develop an opinion on culinary
differences. In warm climates seaside goldenrod may bloom from May through January.
329
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, ENTIRE 14 Seaside goldenrod Solidago sempervirens Asteraceae (Composite family) UCK erect CHECK: stems with Large, narrow, entire, erect, evergreen leaves crawded tall, lanceolate leaves; clusters of small yellow flower heads near ID difficulty the of 2. DESCRIPTION: Basal leaves Perennial evergreen spreading by short rhizomes to form multiple crowns. lanceolate in two-ranked clumps, to 14" (36 cm) long, erect or ascending, adjacent with a tapered tip and base. Blades glossy, smooth, thick, hairless, flat, linear- silvery below when mature. Midvein offset by light color, deeply depressed above entire, the leaf base but weakly depressed distally, protruding with a blunt keel on the underside. near Veins and veinlets are flat on both sides; a few secondary veins at very low angles of 10-15° run for blade length (almost parallel). Petioles of basal leaves 20-40% of blade length, deeply channeled. nested much of the the base, the edges with broad, sharp, green wings gently broadening into the leaf. Stems 3-8 near tall unbranched below the inflorescence, smooth, roundish or sometimes slightly flattened (especially near basel. faintly ridged, hairless or with faint hairs following the ridges. Stem leaves somewhat smaller than the basal (much smaller in the inflorescence), alternate, tapered and deeply folded at the base, without a clear petiole; their broad bases clasp the stem. Inflores- cence a terminal panicle with many raceme-like branches, the branches erect, scarcely diverging from the main stalk, the heads numerous, crowded, tending toward one side. Heads yellow, 1 cm or more long, with ray and disk florets. LYDS prominent and stiff. HABITAT: Sunny, disturbed areas along the ocean (occasionally inland), especially where organic matter and moisture collect, ranging from dunes to marsh edges. Native. FOOD USE: Tender young leaves, and the shoots after peeling, can be eaten raw or cooked. The season of availability is long, especially in the South. Leaves can be used for tea. They are aromatic like other goldenrods but much more substantial and not as strong. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: I'm not keen on eating goldenrod greens, but this is perhaps the best of a mediocre group, if for no reason other than it's size, succulence, and faint saltiness. Seaside goldenrod is divided into two species by some taxonomists, in which case the southern form, more characteristic of marshes and having smaller flower heads, is called S. mexicana. I have eaten both, but not enough to develop an opinion on culinary differences. In warm climates seaside goldenrod may bloom from May through January. 329 