laceae (Borage family
ALTERNATE,
burdock
ENTIRE
2
2
2
genus Arctium
FH-324
Asteraceae
OPICK IL difficulty CHECK: 1. Rosettes of huge broad leaves on long family)
(Composite
anched
DEED
DESCRIPTION:
Massive
sive, and dark up to 3" (8 the cm) thick and monocarpic 40" m) perennials long, fleshy, 4-7 light (1.2-2.1m) grayish tall and spreading almost mde. Roots
to wedge-shaped, near top, with a single crown. Basal leaves 3-9 in radiating inside, vertical with few sirle branches
hairy. Major veins light ruffled in color or wavy, and the flat tip or blunt to rounded, the a base heart-shaped. rosette. 10- The 28 (25) upper surfac cm, long, avate
and is densely nearly so; veinlets depressed. 17 finely
but there may covered be nipple-like with fine whitish-gray wool. Margins wavy are or irregular, The not underside sharply or nas protruding /eins
projections. (I wouldn't disagree if you called some of them toothed. regularly out toothed.
people at a glance consider the leaf entire. Petioles about equal renst
to the blade, up to 1" (2.5 cm) thick, the surface woolly, origedonal
sides, with a channel on top. Stems solid, stout, 1-2
thick at the base, often purple in the lower parts, heavily honred
the surface with round-topped ridges. Branches ascend Chally
only in the upper 2/3. Stem leaves alternate, progressively smaller
with shorter petioles. Inflorescence a panicle of several heads
branch tips. Heads spherical, 0.8-1,6" (2-4 cm) in diameter,
tended by hooked bracts; the numerous thin florets are purple
white, giving the appearance of an old-fashioned shaving - -
These ripen into the familiar vexatious burs.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Often confused with rhubarb but
barb leaves are smoother and glossy, not woolly beneath. and
petioles have no hollow parts.
HABITAT: Disturbed areas with moderate to rich soil, well-drained
in full sun: roadsides, barnyards, old fields and pastures, forest
edges, fencerows, river floodplains. All species introduced
FOOD USE: Roots can be collected all year from plants without
stems. They grow very deep and require extensive excavation, but
are often large enough to be worth it. Make a deep hole beside
the root, then carefully loosen it sideways. The top of the root is
tough; the good part is the lower 2/3. Use roots in pot roast or stew
boiled, or sliced and fried. Cut stalks at the base when less than
1/3 of their final height and still vigorously growing (in late spring
or early summer, well before any branches appear), then peel the
outer rind. Cut the peeled stalk into sections and use like potatoes.
The whiter lower part of the stalk takes much longer to cook than
the greenish upper part. Petioles can also be used before they have
reached full size. The outer surface is bitter and should be peeled
scraped off, then rinsed. After this they can be used in soups
or or stew; the texture (but not the flavor) is reminiscent of celery.
COMMENTS: Burdocks are easy to recognize as a group, amazingly but the
individual species can be hard to tell apart. These burdock's are roots
and labor-efficient food plants. Common seek great
useful much culinary disappointment; it is best to and
account for for this use. The young stalks of all species the sources are good, claim-
burdock easiest part to use. advise you toignore burdock stems
are the themselves are edible. Handling extremely bitter
ing that the leaves common burdock) will put an off carefully lest
and leaves (especially on your fingers that should be washed on the next page.)
substance you ruin the next food you touch. (Continued
Great burdock root (see next page)
B
laceae (Borage family ALTERNATE, burdock ENTIRE 2 2 2 genus Arctium FH-324 Asteraceae OPICK IL difficulty CHECK: 1. Rosettes of huge broad leaves on long family) (Composite anched DEED DESCRIPTION: Massive sive, and dark up to 3" (8 the cm) thick and monocarpic 40" m) perennials long, fleshy, 4-7 light (1.2-2.1m) grayish tall and spreading almost mde. Roots to wedge-shaped, near top, with a single crown. Basal leaves 3-9 in radiating inside, vertical with few sirle branches hairy. Major veins light ruffled in color or wavy, and the flat tip or blunt to rounded, the a base heart-shaped. rosette. 10- The 28 (25) upper surfac cm, long, avate and is densely nearly so; veinlets depressed. 17 finely but there may covered be nipple-like with fine whitish-gray wool. Margins wavy are or irregular, The not underside sharply or nas protruding /eins projections. (I wouldn't disagree if you called some of them toothed. regularly out toothed. people at a glance consider the leaf entire. Petioles about equal renst to the blade, up to 1" (2.5 cm) thick, the surface woolly, origedonal sides, with a channel on top. Stems solid, stout, 1-2 thick at the base, often purple in the lower parts, heavily honred the surface with round-topped ridges. Branches ascend Chally only in the upper 2/3. Stem leaves alternate, progressively smaller with shorter petioles. Inflorescence a panicle of several heads branch tips. Heads spherical, 0.8-1,6" (2-4 cm) in diameter, tended by hooked bracts; the numerous thin florets are purple white, giving the appearance of an old-fashioned shaving - - These ripen into the familiar vexatious burs. CONFUSING PLANTS: Often confused with rhubarb but barb leaves are smoother and glossy, not woolly beneath. and petioles have no hollow parts. HABITAT: Disturbed areas with moderate to rich soil, well-drained in full sun: roadsides, barnyards, old fields and pastures, forest edges, fencerows, river floodplains. All species introduced FOOD USE: Roots can be collected all year from plants without stems. They grow very deep and require extensive excavation, but are often large enough to be worth it. Make a deep hole beside the root, then carefully loosen it sideways. The top of the root is tough; the good part is the lower 2/3. Use roots in pot roast or stew boiled, or sliced and fried. Cut stalks at the base when less than 1/3 of their final height and still vigorously growing (in late spring or early summer, well before any branches appear), then peel the outer rind. Cut the peeled stalk into sections and use like potatoes. The whiter lower part of the stalk takes much longer to cook than the greenish upper part. Petioles can also be used before they have reached full size. The outer surface is bitter and should be peeled scraped off, then rinsed. After this they can be used in soups or or stew; the texture (but not the flavor) is reminiscent of celery. COMMENTS: Burdocks are easy to recognize as a group, amazingly but the individual species can be hard to tell apart. These burdock's are roots and labor-efficient food plants. Common seek great useful much culinary disappointment; it is best to and account for for this use. The young stalks of all species the sources are good, claim- burdock easiest part to use. advise you toignore burdock stems are the themselves are edible. Handling extremely bitter ing that the leaves common burdock) will put an off carefully lest and leaves (especially on your fingers that should be washed on the next page.) substance you ruin the next food you touch. (Continued Great burdock root (see next page) B 