Basal leaves large, pointed, folded difficulty along the 2. midvein, on long petioles
DESCRIPTION: covered with stiff Polycarpic perennial from a large entire taproot, margins, the sap arched, slimy. Basal conspicuously leaves in
QUICK CHECK: hairs; coiled flower clusters. ID
a rosette. 8-14' the (20-36 midvein, cm) the long, tip acute-pointed, lanceolate with the base abruptly broadening, depressed above both sides and
densely folded along covered with long, stiff hairs. Midvein light 40-60°, in color, arching deeply forward, breaking up, and forming strongly a protruding scalloped
protruding below. before Secondary the margins. veins Secondary 6-8 per side, veins and veinlets are deeply below, depressed with a above deep and V-channel with sharp
pattern Petioles well 60-80% of the blade length, deeper than wide, keeled cm) tall, clumped, mostly leaning,
margins, wings extending downward from each with broadly
below. covered with stiff erect to leaning hairs. Stems 2.5-4.5' (75-135 node. Branches in the upper third,
hairy, roundish, solid, tough, with Stem leaves alternate, similar in shape but smaller, sessile with a or calyx of a 5 sharp,
short and strongly Inflorescence ascending. a branching terminal cluster coiled to one side. Flowers to white, the tip with
winged petiole. the corolla with an elongated bell shape, 0,6" (15 mm) long, purple the corolla falls
triangular 5 very short lobes, lobes curled outward; 2 thin, spear-like, white styles lengthen and persist after away.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Foxglove (p. 667) has smaller, toothed leaves and a velvety texture from fine, soft
hairs; the flowers are very different.
HABITAT: Full sun to moderate shade in rich but well-drained soil. Roadsides, old fields, orchards, old
homesteads. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Gather the young, tender leaves in spring and use as greens raw or cooked. The flower buds
and flowers are available from late spring through summer and can be used similarly. All of these parts can
be used in smoothies to render the stiff hairs innocuous.
COMMENTS: This has been one of the most popular plants in temperate herb gardens for millennia. Once
established, colonies can live for centuries, so it inevitably persists after escape.
WARNING: Comfrey contains pyrrolizidine alkaloids, which are liver toxins-the greens much less than the
roots While the greens have been eaten for thousands of years, chronic consumption of large amounts has
resulted in serious medical issues. However, most comfrey-related problems have resulted from persistent
medicinal use of comfrey root tea or extracts.
330
Basal leaves large, pointed, folded difficulty along the 2. midvein, on long petioles DESCRIPTION: covered with stiff Polycarpic perennial from a large entire taproot, margins, the sap arched, slimy. Basal conspicuously leaves in QUICK CHECK: hairs; coiled flower clusters. ID a rosette. 8-14' the (20-36 midvein, cm) the long, tip acute-pointed, lanceolate with the base abruptly broadening, depressed above both sides and densely folded along covered with long, stiff hairs. Midvein light 40-60°, in color, arching deeply forward, breaking up, and forming strongly a protruding scalloped protruding below. before Secondary the margins. veins Secondary 6-8 per side, veins and veinlets are deeply below, depressed with a above deep and V-channel with sharp pattern Petioles well 60-80% of the blade length, deeper than wide, keeled cm) tall, clumped, mostly leaning, margins, wings extending downward from each with broadly below. covered with stiff erect to leaning hairs. Stems 2.5-4.5' (75-135 node. Branches in the upper third, hairy, roundish, solid, tough, with Stem leaves alternate, similar in shape but smaller, sessile with a or calyx of a 5 sharp, short and strongly Inflorescence ascending. a branching terminal cluster coiled to one side. Flowers to white, the tip with winged petiole. the corolla with an elongated bell shape, 0,6" (15 mm) long, purple the corolla falls triangular 5 very short lobes, lobes curled outward; 2 thin, spear-like, white styles lengthen and persist after away. CONFUSING PLANTS: Foxglove (p. 667) has smaller, toothed leaves and a velvety texture from fine, soft hairs; the flowers are very different. HABITAT: Full sun to moderate shade in rich but well-drained soil. Roadsides, old fields, orchards, old homesteads. Introduced. FOOD USE: Gather the young, tender leaves in spring and use as greens raw or cooked. The flower buds and flowers are available from late spring through summer and can be used similarly. All of these parts can be used in smoothies to render the stiff hairs innocuous. COMMENTS: This has been one of the most popular plants in temperate herb gardens for millennia. Once established, colonies can live for centuries, so it inevitably persists after escape. WARNING: Comfrey contains pyrrolizidine alkaloids, which are liver toxins-the greens much less than the roots While the greens have been eaten for thousands of years, chronic consumption of large amounts has resulted in serious medical issues. However, most comfrey-related problems have resulted from persistent medicinal use of comfrey root tea or extracts. 330 