BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNA
16 Great burdock
Arctium lappa
This is the species widely cultivated in Japan, and it is the best one The to use roots for food. are
larger, sweeter,
and more tender,
and the stems
and petioles are
thicker. Distinguished by its broad,
heart-shaped leaves without nipple-
like projections on the margin, petioles
with only a small hollow vessel, and
larger burs borne on long stems in
spreading clusters.
17 Common burdock Arctium minus
Common burdock has trian-
gular leaves and channeled
petioles that have a larger
hollow in the center; the
burs are smaller and borne
in tight clusters on short
stems. This species is similar to great burdock
but of slightly lesser quality as a vegetable, with
narrower, woodier roots.
(below left and right) Peeled and unpeeled
shoots of common burdock.
18 Woolly burdock Arctium tomentosa
Woolly burdock is similar to
great burdock in form but
the flowerheads are covered
with a spiderweb-like wool,
and the leaf margins have
nipple-like projections.
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNA 16 Great burdock Arctium lappa This is the species widely cultivated in Japan, and it is the best one The to use roots for food. are larger, sweeter, and more tender, and the stems and petioles are thicker. Distinguished by its broad, heart-shaped leaves without nipple- like projections on the margin, petioles with only a small hollow vessel, and larger burs borne on long stems in spreading clusters. 17 Common burdock Arctium minus Common burdock has trian- gular leaves and channeled petioles that have a larger hollow in the center; the burs are smaller and borne in tight clusters on short stems. This species is similar to great burdock but of slightly lesser quality as a vegetable, with narrower, woodier roots. (below left and right) Peeled and unpeeled shoots of common burdock. 18 Woolly burdock Arctium tomentosa Woolly burdock is similar to great burdock in form but the flowerheads are covered with a spiderweb-like wool, and the leaf margins have nipple-like projections. 