STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE. ENTIRE
19 New England aster
3
Aster novae-angliae
Asteraceae (Aster/Composite family)
UICK CHECK: Rosette of narrow, hairy, sessile leaves; stem hairy with
ing leaves; large purple flowerheads in autumn. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a short rhizome, usually with multiple clumped stems Old
plants produce several rosettes in proximity. Rosette leaves crowded, sessile, hairy, flat,
evenly tapered, the tips sharp but not acuminate, 3-5" (8-13 cm) long, the bases with two
broad lobes. The surfaces have scattered, stiff, erect hairs-denser above. Midvein straight
and nearly white, scarcely depressed above and protruding below, broadening dramatically at the base Sec
ondary veins are thin, clear, depressed, arising near the base. Rosettes disappear by flowering Stems 2 6
(60-180 cm) tall, erect at first but often leaning in bloom, 4-8 mm thick, round with a few fine grooves. solid.
hardly tapered, stiff, straight, evenly and densely covered with stiff, erect hairs-often glandular. especially
above. Branches straight, simple, strongly ascending, only in the upper third. Stem leaves sessile and clasping,
closely spaced and overlapping, the base with two backward-pointing, slightly downcurved, blunt lobes. Blades
are 1.2-3" (3-8 cm) long, often twisted, broadest near the base and tapered to the sharp tip, shallowly folded
near the base but flattening in the distal half. The upper surface is finely hairy and rough with a network
veinlets; the bottom is hairless. Margins entire, finely hairy, slightly downturned. Inflorescence (late summer
through fall) a leafy panicle with densely glandular branches bearing many composite heads subtended %
numerous long, narrow bracts. Heads 1.2-1.8" (3-4.6 cm) wide, with 40-50 rays, typically purple but sometimes
reddish or pink (rarely white). Disk florets are yellow with a strong sunflower smell.
HABITAT: Sunny, open areas, moist or dry: old fields, prairies, meadows, roadsides, lightly used pastures
marsh edges, weedy areas near lakeshores. Native, but widely planted.
FOOD USE: Tender young leaves and stem tips are a nice green; 1 prefer them raw. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This is the large, strikingly beautiful purple aster that livens up roadsides in autumn, and for
that reason it is widely planted as an ornamental-several cultivars have been developed It is not 50 bold
or easily spotted in spring or early summer when the greens are eaten. Asters have a distinctive, aromatic
almost piney flavor, but this species is one of the mildest and best-the youngest leaves taste like sunflower
microgreens. AKA Symphyotrichum novae-angliae.
RELATED EDIBLES: All of our asters
(genus Aster or Symphyotricnum) are
edible or nontoxic. Most are too small
tough, or strong-flavored to be worth
seeking, but a few others are quite good
STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE. ENTIRE 19 New England aster 3 Aster novae-angliae Asteraceae (Aster/Composite family) UICK CHECK: Rosette of narrow, hairy, sessile leaves; stem hairy with ing leaves; large purple flowerheads in autumn. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a short rhizome, usually with multiple clumped stems Old plants produce several rosettes in proximity. Rosette leaves crowded, sessile, hairy, flat, evenly tapered, the tips sharp but not acuminate, 3-5" (8-13 cm) long, the bases with two broad lobes. The surfaces have scattered, stiff, erect hairs-denser above. Midvein straight and nearly white, scarcely depressed above and protruding below, broadening dramatically at the base Sec ondary veins are thin, clear, depressed, arising near the base. Rosettes disappear by flowering Stems 2 6 (60-180 cm) tall, erect at first but often leaning in bloom, 4-8 mm thick, round with a few fine grooves. solid. hardly tapered, stiff, straight, evenly and densely covered with stiff, erect hairs-often glandular. especially above. Branches straight, simple, strongly ascending, only in the upper third. Stem leaves sessile and clasping, closely spaced and overlapping, the base with two backward-pointing, slightly downcurved, blunt lobes. Blades are 1.2-3" (3-8 cm) long, often twisted, broadest near the base and tapered to the sharp tip, shallowly folded near the base but flattening in the distal half. The upper surface is finely hairy and rough with a network veinlets; the bottom is hairless. Margins entire, finely hairy, slightly downturned. Inflorescence (late summer through fall) a leafy panicle with densely glandular branches bearing many composite heads subtended % numerous long, narrow bracts. Heads 1.2-1.8" (3-4.6 cm) wide, with 40-50 rays, typically purple but sometimes reddish or pink (rarely white). Disk florets are yellow with a strong sunflower smell. HABITAT: Sunny, open areas, moist or dry: old fields, prairies, meadows, roadsides, lightly used pastures marsh edges, weedy areas near lakeshores. Native, but widely planted. FOOD USE: Tender young leaves and stem tips are a nice green; 1 prefer them raw. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This is the large, strikingly beautiful purple aster that livens up roadsides in autumn, and for that reason it is widely planted as an ornamental-several cultivars have been developed It is not 50 bold or easily spotted in spring or early summer when the greens are eaten. Asters have a distinctive, aromatic almost piney flavor, but this species is one of the mildest and best-the youngest leaves taste like sunflower microgreens. AKA Symphyotrichum novae-angliae. RELATED EDIBLES: All of our asters (genus Aster or Symphyotricnum) are edible or nontoxic. Most are too small tough, or strong-flavored to be worth seeking, but a few others are quite good 