BASAL LEAVES PRESENT,
20 Hoary alyssum
Brassicaceae 2 (Mustard family)
Berteroa incana
gray-green mustard of dry, sunny sites, the leaves rough ID difficulty and mostly 1.
basal; QUICK racemes CHECK: of Low, small white flowers with 4 petals in opposing pairs.
Biennial short-lived perennial from a stout root with multiple rosettes crowns.
DESCRIPTION: Basal leaves numerous. usually or wilting before flowering, in a rosette or multiple gently
packed together, 3-6" (8-15 long, tapered
to the base, obianceolate, blunt-tipped, gray-green,
roughened on both sides by stiff hairs appressed toward the tip. Mid-
vein depressed above and protruding below; secondary veins scarcely
evident. Margins wavy, entire, hairy. Petioles 30-70% of blade length,
pale green, flat-topped. Stems several per plant, leaning to decumbent,
to 32" (80 cm) long, usually unbranched below the inflorescence, 2-4 mm
thick, rounded, solid, reddish to green, covered with stiff, appressed hairs
pointing toward the tip. Stem leaves alternate, sessile, similar to basal
leaves but shorter, evenly distributed along the stem before blooming
but sparse toward the top on flowering plants. Inflorescence ascending
racemes 6-14" (15-36 cm) long, with several flowers packed in a flat
cluster at the tip; mature pods numerous and evenly spaced. Flow-
ers (summer) 3-4 mm across. Sepals 4, hairy, green. Petals 4, white, in
opposing pairs, each petal split nearly to the base, the lobes rounded.
Pistils and stamens are yellow-green. Pod plump, elliptic, 5-8 mm long,
containing numerous small seeds. After the plant withers, the pods fall
off but the outer rim usually remains attached, leaving a raceme of "ghost
pods" by which the plant can be identified long after the top is dead.
HABITAT: Dry, disturbed, sunny ground, especially with poor, sandy
soil. Common along roadsides, railroads, beaches, gravel pits, parking
lots, fallow fields, sandy meadows, lawn edges. Introduced.
FOOD USE: The thin shoots can be eaten raw or cooked. Get them
before they become tough and raspy with stiff hairs. I usually discard
most of the young leaves, which roughen before the stems. The seeds
can be used sparingly as a seasoning.
COMMENTS: The edible part is too small to be an important vegetable,
but the taste is easy to describe: hot cabbage.
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, 20 Hoary alyssum Brassicaceae 2 (Mustard family) Berteroa incana gray-green mustard of dry, sunny sites, the leaves rough ID difficulty and mostly 1. basal; QUICK racemes CHECK: of Low, small white flowers with 4 petals in opposing pairs. Biennial short-lived perennial from a stout root with multiple rosettes crowns. DESCRIPTION: Basal leaves numerous. usually or wilting before flowering, in a rosette or multiple gently packed together, 3-6" (8-15 long, tapered to the base, obianceolate, blunt-tipped, gray-green, roughened on both sides by stiff hairs appressed toward the tip. Mid- vein depressed above and protruding below; secondary veins scarcely evident. Margins wavy, entire, hairy. Petioles 30-70% of blade length, pale green, flat-topped. Stems several per plant, leaning to decumbent, to 32" (80 cm) long, usually unbranched below the inflorescence, 2-4 mm thick, rounded, solid, reddish to green, covered with stiff, appressed hairs pointing toward the tip. Stem leaves alternate, sessile, similar to basal leaves but shorter, evenly distributed along the stem before blooming but sparse toward the top on flowering plants. Inflorescence ascending racemes 6-14" (15-36 cm) long, with several flowers packed in a flat cluster at the tip; mature pods numerous and evenly spaced. Flow- ers (summer) 3-4 mm across. Sepals 4, hairy, green. Petals 4, white, in opposing pairs, each petal split nearly to the base, the lobes rounded. Pistils and stamens are yellow-green. Pod plump, elliptic, 5-8 mm long, containing numerous small seeds. After the plant withers, the pods fall off but the outer rim usually remains attached, leaving a raceme of "ghost pods" by which the plant can be identified long after the top is dead. HABITAT: Dry, disturbed, sunny ground, especially with poor, sandy soil. Common along roadsides, railroads, beaches, gravel pits, parking lots, fallow fields, sandy meadows, lawn edges. Introduced. FOOD USE: The thin shoots can be eaten raw or cooked. Get them before they become tough and raspy with stiff hairs. I usually discard most of the young leaves, which roughen before the stems. The seeds can be used sparingly as a seasoning. COMMENTS: The edible part is too small to be an important vegetable, but the taste is easy to describe: hot cabbage. 