assicacede (Mustard f
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
GROUP 23 BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
The plants in this group belong to several families, of which the mustard family (Brassicaceae)
the most important. All plants in group 23 provide leafy greens or stems (for it 15
both). Six species produce an edible underground storage organ- but none of them many qualify
as staple root vegetables. One species makes an edible fleshy fruit. The plants in this group
are not particularly tricky, and there are few dangerous look-similars
Burdock and lesser celandine are placed in group 22 but might key here because their leaf
veir
margins are faintly toothed or wavy, and interpretations of toothiness vary.
Margins
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 23
The key is not your final answer!
Sapimilky; flowers bluish with 5 petals.
Basal leaves mostly roundish and soon withering.
Stem leaves narrow and linear, hairless; stem ridges hairless.
1. Harebell
or or
Stem leaves lanceolate, hairy; stem ridges hairy.
2. American bellflower
Basal leaves mostly heart-shaped; some persist to flowering.
3. Creeping bellflower
Sappot milky.
Leaf surfaces generally hairless (rarely the midvein or margin may have hairs).
Basal leaves roundish to heart or kidney-shaped.
Stems hollow, flowers with 5-10 yellow petals.
Forms carpets; stems to 7 mm thick; leaves less than 2" (5 cm) across, often with purple
centers. Lesser celandine (p. 321).
or
Forms clumps; stems often over 11 mm thick; leaves over 2" (5 cm) across, never with
4. Marsh-marigold
or
purple centers.
Stems solid: flowers with 4 white petals.
5. Scurvy-grass
Seashore annual with stout, spreading stems and bulbous pods.
6. Bulbous bittercress
Moist-soil perennial with thin, erect stems and long, thin pods.
or
Basal leaves elliptic to obovate with a blunt, rounded tip.
7. Field pennycress
Stem with faint wing-ridges, hairless; pods 9-17 mm, flat.
B. Garlic pennycress
or
Stem not ridged, hairy in the lower half; pods 5-8 mm, half-inflated.
Basal leaves long-elliptic, long-lanceolate, to linear with a pointed tip.
9. Horseradish
Teeth rounded; larger veins white.
Teeth bristle-like; veins not white.
10. Smooth rock cress
Leaves less than 10" (25 cm) long: flowers in racemes.
14. Rattlesnake master
or
Leaves often over 14" (36 cm); flowers in ball-like umbels.
15. Strawberry spinach
COMMENTS
At Basal leaves (check both!) has sparse or dense hairs distributed across petiole it.
triangular to arrowhead-shaped.
least Blades one leaf surface and lower leaves taper gradually; it is hard to say where lateral the veins; teeth begins.
Basal of leaves basal mostly ground-hugging, rippled between prominent faint
16. Evening primrose
11. Dame's rocket
or
and blunt; hairs mostly soft. erect, not rippled: teeth prominent and and lower erratic; leaves. hairs stiff.
The Basal change leaves from petiole to blade is more sudden length. on basal
Leaves commonly soft-woolly exceed below, 12" veins (30 cm) depressed in above. Burdock above. (p. 331).
17. Prairie-dock
or
Blade Blade rough-hairy below, veins flat or protruding
Leaves less than 10" (25 cm) long.
12. Whitetop
Flowers with 4 petals and arranged in a raceme.
13. Garlic mustard
gray-woolly; upper leaves appressed and clasping. clasping.
18. Bigteaf aster
or
Flowers Leaf not with numerous petals, petals (ray Individual florets) at arranged the end of a a long, panicle. hairless. hooked stalk.
Leaf woolly; upper leaves net appressed or in
19. Canada violet
20. Common yolet
or
Flowers Petals with white 5 unequal with a yellow base; leaf moderately hairy to
Petals yellow: leaf densely soft-hairy.
assicacede (Mustard f BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED GROUP 23 BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED The plants in this group belong to several families, of which the mustard family (Brassicaceae) the most important. All plants in group 23 provide leafy greens or stems (for it 15 both). Six species produce an edible underground storage organ- but none of them many qualify as staple root vegetables. One species makes an edible fleshy fruit. The plants in this group are not particularly tricky, and there are few dangerous look-similars Burdock and lesser celandine are placed in group 22 but might key here because their leaf veir margins are faintly toothed or wavy, and interpretations of toothiness vary. Margins TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 23 The key is not your final answer! Sapimilky; flowers bluish with 5 petals. Basal leaves mostly roundish and soon withering. Stem leaves narrow and linear, hairless; stem ridges hairless. 1. Harebell or or Stem leaves lanceolate, hairy; stem ridges hairy. 2. American bellflower Basal leaves mostly heart-shaped; some persist to flowering. 3. Creeping bellflower Sappot milky. Leaf surfaces generally hairless (rarely the midvein or margin may have hairs). Basal leaves roundish to heart or kidney-shaped. Stems hollow, flowers with 5-10 yellow petals. Forms carpets; stems to 7 mm thick; leaves less than 2" (5 cm) across, often with purple centers. Lesser celandine (p. 321). or Forms clumps; stems often over 11 mm thick; leaves over 2" (5 cm) across, never with 4. Marsh-marigold or purple centers. Stems solid: flowers with 4 white petals. 5. Scurvy-grass Seashore annual with stout, spreading stems and bulbous pods. 6. Bulbous bittercress Moist-soil perennial with thin, erect stems and long, thin pods. or Basal leaves elliptic to obovate with a blunt, rounded tip. 7. Field pennycress Stem with faint wing-ridges, hairless; pods 9-17 mm, flat. B. Garlic pennycress or Stem not ridged, hairy in the lower half; pods 5-8 mm, half-inflated. Basal leaves long-elliptic, long-lanceolate, to linear with a pointed tip. 9. Horseradish Teeth rounded; larger veins white. Teeth bristle-like; veins not white. 10. Smooth rock cress Leaves less than 10" (25 cm) long: flowers in racemes. 14. Rattlesnake master or Leaves often over 14" (36 cm); flowers in ball-like umbels. 15. Strawberry spinach COMMENTS At Basal leaves (check both!) has sparse or dense hairs distributed across petiole it. triangular to arrowhead-shaped. least Blades one leaf surface and lower leaves taper gradually; it is hard to say where lateral the veins; teeth begins. Basal of leaves basal mostly ground-hugging, rippled between prominent faint 16. Evening primrose 11. Dame's rocket or and blunt; hairs mostly soft. erect, not rippled: teeth prominent and and lower erratic; leaves. hairs stiff. The Basal change leaves from petiole to blade is more sudden length. on basal Leaves commonly soft-woolly exceed below, 12" veins (30 cm) depressed in above. Burdock above. (p. 331). 17. Prairie-dock or Blade Blade rough-hairy below, veins flat or protruding Leaves less than 10" (25 cm) long. 12. Whitetop Flowers with 4 petals and arranged in a raceme. 13. Garlic mustard gray-woolly; upper leaves appressed and clasping. clasping. 18. Bigteaf aster or Flowers Leaf not with numerous petals, petals (ray Individual florets) at arranged the end of a a long, panicle. hairless. hooked stalk. Leaf woolly; upper leaves net appressed or in 19. Canada violet 20. Common yolet or Flowers Petals with white 5 unequal with a yellow base; leaf moderately hairy to Petals yellow: leaf densely soft-hairy. 