- TOOTHED,
ifolio family Companulacece
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
2
American bellflower
3
Campanula
3
americana
2
family
Campanulaceae
QUICK milky; 5-lobed CHECK: Tall, straight, thin stem with well
L blue flowers with long, protruding, upturned long it y/o ID difficulty
from ESCRIPTION: the bottom Erect winter annual with milky sap. The leaves ,
shoots emerge. Basal up as the plant ages. Rosette overwinters but withers turn brown in and wither
long, on channeled leaves blunt-tipped, broadly oval to heart spring as the
erect, petioles 2-3 times the blade length, hairy on the shaped, to cm)
the shoot proportionately stage, with thin, 3-7' (1-2 m) tall and 0.2-0.6" (5-15 mm) margin. thick. Stems straight,
ridges may have whitish many small in ridges (2 running down from each node) topped round. with thick walled and hollow
in the middle third, slender wings the inflorescence. Branches can be few to many; If long, shiff hairs- incre
182165
the center. Stem leaves and simple, up to 4' (1.2 m) long, strongly ascending, present, they are toward mos by
ovate-lanceolate with to 7" (18 cm) long, sessile, narrowly tapering at the base before often curving back
wings-especially at the base. on the upper leaves, which have narrower wings.) These wings become evenly
a sharp acuminate tip. (This could also be interpreted as a petiole abruptly with widerice "age"
have Midvein depressed above and protruding below, as are the 5-6 secondary veins strongly AD
scattered needle-like hairs below; the upper surface is nearly hairless. Margins long-hairy, per side finely
remotely serrated, the teeth pointing forward and curving inviact
rolling wave with a light-colored claw at the tip, Upper leaves are
and droop; they often have a dimple near the base. Inflorescence
terminal, spike-like racemes 10-40" (25-100 long. The lower parting
(Continued on the next page
337
Basal leaves.
- TOOTHED, ifolio family Companulacece 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 2 American bellflower 3 Campanula 3 americana 2 family Campanulaceae QUICK milky; 5-lobed CHECK: Tall, straight, thin stem with well L blue flowers with long, protruding, upturned long it y/o ID difficulty from ESCRIPTION: the bottom Erect winter annual with milky sap. The leaves , shoots emerge. Basal up as the plant ages. Rosette overwinters but withers turn brown in and wither long, on channeled leaves blunt-tipped, broadly oval to heart spring as the erect, petioles 2-3 times the blade length, hairy on the shaped, to cm) the shoot proportionately stage, with thin, 3-7' (1-2 m) tall and 0.2-0.6" (5-15 mm) margin. thick. Stems straight, ridges may have whitish many small in ridges (2 running down from each node) topped round. with thick walled and hollow in the middle third, slender wings the inflorescence. Branches can be few to many; If long, shiff hairs- incre 182165 the center. Stem leaves and simple, up to 4' (1.2 m) long, strongly ascending, present, they are toward mos by ovate-lanceolate with to 7" (18 cm) long, sessile, narrowly tapering at the base before often curving back wings-especially at the base. on the upper leaves, which have narrower wings.) These wings become evenly a sharp acuminate tip. (This could also be interpreted as a petiole abruptly with widerice "age" have Midvein depressed above and protruding below, as are the 5-6 secondary veins strongly AD scattered needle-like hairs below; the upper surface is nearly hairless. Margins long-hairy, per side finely remotely serrated, the teeth pointing forward and curving inviact rolling wave with a light-colored claw at the tip, Upper leaves are and droop; they often have a dimple near the base. Inflorescence terminal, spike-like racemes 10-40" (25-100 long. The lower parting (Continued on the next page 337 Basal leaves. 