BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
Harebell
1
3
2
3
1
Campanula
rotundifolia
family
Campanulaceae
QUICK CHECK: Thin, wiry, erect stems with linear leaves and nodding, bell-like blue
flowers; basal leaves rounded or elongated; sap milky. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a rhizome, sometimes forming small, dense colonies. less
Rhizomes whitish, knobby, crooked, branching, erratic in thickness but generally few
than 8 mm in diameter. Sap milky. Rosettes are present in spring but only rarely do a
leaves persist to flowering. Basal leaves roundish, with a deep sinus or ear-like lobes at
the base, 0.6-1.5" (1.5-4 cm) across, hairless, the margins with scattered blunt teeth or notched, the notches
often white-dotted. Some basal leaves are elongated and blunt-tipped. All major veins arise from the base
and are not depressed. Petioles very thin, longer than the blade, out of plane with it, channeled, purple or
green. Stems usually clumped, erect, 12-22" (30-56 cm) tall, unbranched or sparsely branched near the top,
purple-brown near the base but green higher up, mostly hairless but faintly hairy near the base. Cross section
round but with a small double-ridge coming down from each node. Stem leaves utterly different from basal
leaves: alternate, linear, sessile, long-tapered to the base, overlapping, strongly ascending to erect. Lower
stem leaves are wider toward the tip and may have a few teeth; upper leaves are entire. Inflorescence a loose,
branching cluster (or flowers single) with thread-like leaves, the pedicels thread-thin, nodding to the side in
bloom. Flowers (summer) blue, 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) long, the corolla bell-like, fused for more than half its
length, then spreading into 5 abruptly pointed lobes. Calyx has 5 linear, pointed, spreading lobes. The pistil has
a purple style and white stigma split into 3 recurved parts; there are coiled stamens in the base of the flower.
HABITAT: Dry, sunny, poor, well-drained soil. Pine barrens, cliffs and ledges, steep banks, gravel pits, shore-
lines, rocky or sandy prairies. Native.
FOOD USE: Rhizomes taste okay but are small and rather tough. Young leaves and shoots can be eaten raw
or cooked. Flowers make an attractive, mildly-flavored garnish or nibble. Conservation 3/2/1.
COMMENTS: The basal and stem leaves are so different that it is hard to reconcile their production by the
same plant. The new shoots in late spring are a superb, little-known vegetable.
336
Basal leaves (including the narrow ones).
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED Harebell 1 3 2 3 1 Campanula rotundifolia family Campanulaceae QUICK CHECK: Thin, wiry, erect stems with linear leaves and nodding, bell-like blue flowers; basal leaves rounded or elongated; sap milky. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a rhizome, sometimes forming small, dense colonies. less Rhizomes whitish, knobby, crooked, branching, erratic in thickness but generally few than 8 mm in diameter. Sap milky. Rosettes are present in spring but only rarely do a leaves persist to flowering. Basal leaves roundish, with a deep sinus or ear-like lobes at the base, 0.6-1.5" (1.5-4 cm) across, hairless, the margins with scattered blunt teeth or notched, the notches often white-dotted. Some basal leaves are elongated and blunt-tipped. All major veins arise from the base and are not depressed. Petioles very thin, longer than the blade, out of plane with it, channeled, purple or green. Stems usually clumped, erect, 12-22" (30-56 cm) tall, unbranched or sparsely branched near the top, purple-brown near the base but green higher up, mostly hairless but faintly hairy near the base. Cross section round but with a small double-ridge coming down from each node. Stem leaves utterly different from basal leaves: alternate, linear, sessile, long-tapered to the base, overlapping, strongly ascending to erect. Lower stem leaves are wider toward the tip and may have a few teeth; upper leaves are entire. Inflorescence a loose, branching cluster (or flowers single) with thread-like leaves, the pedicels thread-thin, nodding to the side in bloom. Flowers (summer) blue, 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) long, the corolla bell-like, fused for more than half its length, then spreading into 5 abruptly pointed lobes. Calyx has 5 linear, pointed, spreading lobes. The pistil has a purple style and white stigma split into 3 recurved parts; there are coiled stamens in the base of the flower. HABITAT: Dry, sunny, poor, well-drained soil. Pine barrens, cliffs and ledges, steep banks, gravel pits, shore- lines, rocky or sandy prairies. Native. FOOD USE: Rhizomes taste okay but are small and rather tough. Young leaves and shoots can be eaten raw or cooked. Flowers make an attractive, mildly-flavored garnish or nibble. Conservation 3/2/1. COMMENTS: The basal and stem leaves are so different that it is hard to reconcile their production by the same plant. The new shoots in late spring are a superb, little-known vegetable. 336 Basal leaves (including the narrow ones). 