BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TO
base ary veins of a stalk. from Velns the base. and midvein deeply depressed above and protruding below there
ride. Petioles 1.5-3 times Margins the have broad, rounded, closely -spar ed teeth ,1
with erect hairs blade length with a sharp-edged, dark-green hannet with a my "
round, or the clumps, erect when young, usually gently arched or leaning (60-199)
thick, single in especially small on channel edges and the underside Stems 24 8 that is
the solid, surface green to purplish, smooth with faint ridges running down when from
ridges when young, sometimes becoming hairless with age. Stem leaves alternate, the
to the basal leaves; upward they decrease in size to about 1" (2.5 cm) and become lance
hairy only on the main veins below. Petioles also decrease; upper leaves are sessile Inflor
raceme up to half the stem's length, the flowers single, paired, or in small clusters on di
pedicels tending to one side. Occasionally there are small raceme branches. Flowers (m
0.8-1.4" (2-3.5 cm) long. Corolla blue-purple, bell-like, divided halfway to the base into 5 tr
lobes. Calyx 5 green, narrowly triangular, sharp, spreading to reflexed lobes about 20% of p
round 5-8 mm capsule that dries to release its seeds through multiple openings.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Basal leaves may be told from those of violets or asters by the m
HABITAT: Escaped from cultivation and persistent. Most commonly seen near old home si
to roadsides, meadows, and fields. Likes light shade but sometimes grows in full sun.
FOOD USE: Dig the roots at the base of the plant at any time of year; they are best from 1
They are branched and usually thin near the surface; the enlarged section begins a few inc
cooked. Young leaves and shoots can be gathered when tender in spring and early summe
or cooked, although their texture is hairy. Flowers and flower buds are edible raw or cook
COMMENTS: This is one of our best cooked root vegetables, with a mild and sweet flavo
the slightly fishy taste characteristic of this genus; they are one of my favorite fried green
popular plant of perennial gardens but has now fallen so far out of favor that it has been m
in many jurisdictions, despite minimal invasive tendencies.
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TO base ary veins of a stalk. from Velns the base. and midvein deeply depressed above and protruding below there ride. Petioles 1.5-3 times Margins the have broad, rounded, closely -spar ed teeth ,1 with erect hairs blade length with a sharp-edged, dark-green hannet with a my " round, or the clumps, erect when young, usually gently arched or leaning (60-199) thick, single in especially small on channel edges and the underside Stems 24 8 that is the solid, surface green to purplish, smooth with faint ridges running down when from ridges when young, sometimes becoming hairless with age. Stem leaves alternate, the to the basal leaves; upward they decrease in size to about 1" (2.5 cm) and become lance hairy only on the main veins below. Petioles also decrease; upper leaves are sessile Inflor raceme up to half the stem's length, the flowers single, paired, or in small clusters on di pedicels tending to one side. Occasionally there are small raceme branches. Flowers (m 0.8-1.4" (2-3.5 cm) long. Corolla blue-purple, bell-like, divided halfway to the base into 5 tr lobes. Calyx 5 green, narrowly triangular, sharp, spreading to reflexed lobes about 20% of p round 5-8 mm capsule that dries to release its seeds through multiple openings. CONFUSING PLANTS: Basal leaves may be told from those of violets or asters by the m HABITAT: Escaped from cultivation and persistent. Most commonly seen near old home si to roadsides, meadows, and fields. Likes light shade but sometimes grows in full sun. FOOD USE: Dig the roots at the base of the plant at any time of year; they are best from 1 They are branched and usually thin near the surface; the enlarged section begins a few inc cooked. Young leaves and shoots can be gathered when tender in spring and early summe or cooked, although their texture is hairy. Flowers and flower buds are edible raw or cook COMMENTS: This is one of our best cooked root vegetables, with a mild and sweet flavo the slightly fishy taste characteristic of this genus; they are one of my favorite fried green popular plant of perennial gardens but has now fallen so far out of favor that it has been m in many jurisdictions, despite minimal invasive tendencies. 