BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
American bellflower (continued)
Shoot at the ideal stage for eating
typical leaves, while the upper raceme has a single linear. pointed, downcurved bract, with a prominent light
midvein, beneath each flower. Short pedicels are borne in clusters at leaf nodes. Flower buds are strongly
ridged, purple, and white at the base. Flowers (mid to late summer) about 0.9" (23 mm) across, the corolla
blue with a short tube that spreads widely into 5 pointed, hooked lobes. Sepals are fused at the base, then
wide-spreading and linear. The style protrudes conspicuously and usually curves upward, terminating in a stigma
that splits into 3 or 4 parts. Fruit a small, many-seeded capsule.
HABITAT: Well-drained, rich soil in moderately disturbed hardwood forests, such as steep slopes, high
fioodplains, recently logged forests, forest edges, and dirt road margins. Native.
FOOD and mild. USE: Flower Young shoots and leaves can be eaten raw or cooked, and at the ideal stage are extremely tender
buds and flowers are also edible. Conservation 2/1.
good, COMMENTS: especially American bellflower greens have a peculiar flavor-almost fishy, slightly
when young. It is when the best cooked. of This nearly-unknown edible would be more popular if it were sweet, but very
AKA Campanulastrum americanum. the bellflowers, and remains one of the best kept foraging secrets more in our distinct region.
Creeping bellflower
3
3
Campanula rapunculoides family Campanulaceae 3 2 2
IWE-107
QUICK Yen. with CHECK 1. struing Heart shaped hatry basal leaves, beg oming lanceolate
DESCRIPTION: milky Clonger vertical Basal taproots. on the leaves veins Perennial usually heart blue below) ilustered, purple shaped, forming Basal tlowers 2-6" light leaves colonies brown (5 on are 15 one by cm) and thin side long, smooth rhizomes ID densely difficulty outside that soft-hairy with 2. send on whitish down an on unbranched both flesh. enlarged Sap
present
at
flowering-but
sides
338
not
those
at
the
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED American bellflower (continued) Shoot at the ideal stage for eating typical leaves, while the upper raceme has a single linear. pointed, downcurved bract, with a prominent light midvein, beneath each flower. Short pedicels are borne in clusters at leaf nodes. Flower buds are strongly ridged, purple, and white at the base. Flowers (mid to late summer) about 0.9" (23 mm) across, the corolla blue with a short tube that spreads widely into 5 pointed, hooked lobes. Sepals are fused at the base, then wide-spreading and linear. The style protrudes conspicuously and usually curves upward, terminating in a stigma that splits into 3 or 4 parts. Fruit a small, many-seeded capsule. HABITAT: Well-drained, rich soil in moderately disturbed hardwood forests, such as steep slopes, high fioodplains, recently logged forests, forest edges, and dirt road margins. Native. FOOD and mild. USE: Flower Young shoots and leaves can be eaten raw or cooked, and at the ideal stage are extremely tender buds and flowers are also edible. Conservation 2/1. good, COMMENTS: especially American bellflower greens have a peculiar flavor-almost fishy, slightly when young. It is when the best cooked. of This nearly-unknown edible would be more popular if it were sweet, but very AKA Campanulastrum americanum. the bellflowers, and remains one of the best kept foraging secrets more in our distinct region. Creeping bellflower 3 3 Campanula rapunculoides family Campanulaceae 3 2 2 IWE-107 QUICK Yen. with CHECK 1. struing Heart shaped hatry basal leaves, beg oming lanceolate DESCRIPTION: milky Clonger vertical Basal taproots. on the leaves veins Perennial usually heart blue below) ilustered, purple shaped, forming Basal tlowers 2-6" light leaves colonies brown (5 on are 15 one by cm) and thin side long, smooth rhizomes ID densely difficulty outside that soft-hairy with 2. send on whitish down an on unbranched both flesh. enlarged Sap present at flowering-but sides 338 not those at the 