BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
4
Marsh-marigold Caltha palustris Ranunculaceae 1 E FH-200 (Buttercup family) rounded
Short, Jumped. stout, multi-stemmed, difficulty glossy 2. herb with or
our leaves on long petioles. ID
DESCRIPTION: than long, kidney-shaped and rubbery.
kidney shaped basal Perennial from a stout root system, often with several to roundish adjacent with crowns. a deep
Basal leaves the 3-6 petiole per rosette, attaches, broader 2-8" (5-20 cm) across, hairless, etched glossy, above. thin Margins have
sinus All major where shallow, veins arise rounded from the teeth, base; often these with and whitish veinlets nipple-tips are lightly section, when nearly mature. flat on Petioles top but with 2-3 times a shallow the double blade,
4-10 broad. min thick with a pinhole hollow, D-shaped the outer in cross ones leaning, stout, to 22" (56 cm) furrowed, tall and zigzag, 0.7" (18 usually mm)
groove. Stems typically several and per spongy plant, with a small hollow in the center, reduced shallowly in size with shorter petioles
with a few large branches. sessile). At Nodes harvest time the plant shows many leaves huddled close flower buds pressed
thick, hairless, thick-walled have small papery sheaths. Stem leaves together and the stems
(the uppermost all beyond them, with clumps of spherical, hairless, pea-sized thick, ridged
extending a leaf. scarcely Inflorescence if at single or in clusters up to 7 from the leaf axils, each flower on petals a (sepals),
against Flowers (early to mid spring) bright yellow, up to 2" (5 cm) across with 5-9 overlapping beaked, claw-like pods,
dozens pedicel. of stamens, and several pistils. Fruit a green, star-like cluster of elongated,
splitting open when ripe to release the seeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Lesser celandine (p. 321)
has much smaller leaves and flowers.
HABITAT: Hardwood swamps, shaded or semi-
shaded wet ground, ditches, and occasionally in
open marshland. Native.
FOOD USE: Collect young growth before the
flowers open in early spring. I usually pluck whole
stems with attached leaves and flower buds. To
rid the greens of their bitterness, boil in volu-
minous water for 20 minutes or more, changing
water if desired, then drain. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: In many areas marsh-marigold
can be collected easily in huge quantity and is a
popular spring green. It is rather bitter but can be
made very mild through long cooking, after which
you'll have a pile of super-soft "green pudding."
AKA cowslip.
WARNING: Should not be eaten raw, as it is
1017 107 and quite acrid tasting in this state.
340
Mar mangold scedpod
Young plants at the right stage for eating.
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 4 Marsh-marigold Caltha palustris Ranunculaceae 1 E FH-200 (Buttercup family) rounded Short, Jumped. stout, multi-stemmed, difficulty glossy 2. herb with or our leaves on long petioles. ID DESCRIPTION: than long, kidney-shaped and rubbery. kidney shaped basal Perennial from a stout root system, often with several to roundish adjacent with crowns. a deep Basal leaves the 3-6 petiole per rosette, attaches, broader 2-8" (5-20 cm) across, hairless, etched glossy, above. thin Margins have sinus All major where shallow, veins arise rounded from the teeth, base; often these with and whitish veinlets nipple-tips are lightly section, when nearly mature. flat on Petioles top but with 2-3 times a shallow the double blade, 4-10 broad. min thick with a pinhole hollow, D-shaped the outer in cross ones leaning, stout, to 22" (56 cm) furrowed, tall and zigzag, 0.7" (18 usually mm) groove. Stems typically several and per spongy plant, with a small hollow in the center, reduced shallowly in size with shorter petioles with a few large branches. sessile). At Nodes harvest time the plant shows many leaves huddled close flower buds pressed thick, hairless, thick-walled have small papery sheaths. Stem leaves together and the stems (the uppermost all beyond them, with clumps of spherical, hairless, pea-sized thick, ridged extending a leaf. scarcely Inflorescence if at single or in clusters up to 7 from the leaf axils, each flower on petals a (sepals), against Flowers (early to mid spring) bright yellow, up to 2" (5 cm) across with 5-9 overlapping beaked, claw-like pods, dozens pedicel. of stamens, and several pistils. Fruit a green, star-like cluster of elongated, splitting open when ripe to release the seeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: Lesser celandine (p. 321) has much smaller leaves and flowers. HABITAT: Hardwood swamps, shaded or semi- shaded wet ground, ditches, and occasionally in open marshland. Native. FOOD USE: Collect young growth before the flowers open in early spring. I usually pluck whole stems with attached leaves and flower buds. To rid the greens of their bitterness, boil in volu- minous water for 20 minutes or more, changing water if desired, then drain. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: In many areas marsh-marigold can be collected easily in huge quantity and is a popular spring green. It is rather bitter but can be made very mild through long cooking, after which you'll have a pile of super-soft "green pudding." AKA cowslip. WARNING: Should not be eaten raw, as it is 1017 107 and quite acrid tasting in this state. 340 Mar mangold scedpod Young plants at the right stage for eating. 