cup
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
5 Scurvy-grass
3
genus Cochlearia Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
branching UICK CHECK: stems Tiny plant with small, broad, succulent basal
with small, blunt leaves and 4-petaled flowers leaves ID difficulty an long
fleshy, DESCRIPTION: hairless, almost Small, short-lived perennial or winter annual. Basa! 2.
widening abruptly veinless, 0.3-0.8" (8-20 mm) long and about leaves in a cosette
blunt-tipped. at the base, triangular to broadly ovate, obovate, as or broad. the blade
channeled, Margins usually entire but sometimes wavy or slightly toothed. heart-shaped.
as flowering 0.4-4.5" (1-11 cm) long (longest where they must reach past rocks Petioles thin.
at maturity, approaches. Stems usually multiple, 2-12" long, erect to prostrate for sunlight) Basal leaves wither
Central stems green are with purplish highlights, strongly ridged with internodes often or much decumbent, stice And 'ough
pairs. Stem leaves often erect but shorter with many spreading branches, often in longer than the leaves
usually in borne mostly toward the tips of the branches or stems; they are imperfect whor's Yir off
leaves, offset pairs. The blades are sessile or nearly so, tapered to the base, usually nominally alternate but
with a few blunt teeth in erratic locations. Inflorescence with many small leaves packed narrower behind than Gasal
crowded, terminal raceme to 1" (2.5 cm) long. Flowers (June-August) 4-5 mm across with 4 blunt, it; a short,
white petals, not touching each other. Pod plump, about 5 mm broad and almost equally long, with provate H seam
down the center, turning from green to yellow-brown, containing several rounded seeds.
SPECIES: C. groenlandica and C. tridactylites are very similar and used identically.
HABITAT: Open areas near the sea: beaches, tidal flats, rocky shores and slopes, sometimes tundra or street
banks. Likes high nitrogen levels and therefore is more common where dead seaweeds get caught benied
rocks, or near seabird colonies. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender leaves and stems are eaten raw or cooked. They are excellent-like a slightly salty signny
hot cabbage. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This dainty herb is credited with saving many sailors of yore from scurvy. It has been sometim
cultivated as a vegetable. The genus name means "ear-shaped" in reference to the leaf. Leaf. stem. and DOC
shape is highly variable. While the taxonomy with
this genus remains unsettled, the group is very easy
to recognize. The association with seabird colonies
is dramatic-in some regions it is found nowher-
except the heavy bird turd zones, and it grows much
larger in these locations.
341
cup BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 5 Scurvy-grass 3 genus Cochlearia Brassicaceae (Mustard family) branching UICK CHECK: stems Tiny plant with small, broad, succulent basal with small, blunt leaves and 4-petaled flowers leaves ID difficulty an long fleshy, DESCRIPTION: hairless, almost Small, short-lived perennial or winter annual. Basa! 2. widening abruptly veinless, 0.3-0.8" (8-20 mm) long and about leaves in a cosette blunt-tipped. at the base, triangular to broadly ovate, obovate, as or broad. the blade channeled, Margins usually entire but sometimes wavy or slightly toothed. heart-shaped. as flowering 0.4-4.5" (1-11 cm) long (longest where they must reach past rocks Petioles thin. at maturity, approaches. Stems usually multiple, 2-12" long, erect to prostrate for sunlight) Basal leaves wither Central stems green are with purplish highlights, strongly ridged with internodes often or much decumbent, stice And 'ough pairs. Stem leaves often erect but shorter with many spreading branches, often in longer than the leaves usually in borne mostly toward the tips of the branches or stems; they are imperfect whor's Yir off leaves, offset pairs. The blades are sessile or nearly so, tapered to the base, usually nominally alternate but with a few blunt teeth in erratic locations. Inflorescence with many small leaves packed narrower behind than Gasal crowded, terminal raceme to 1" (2.5 cm) long. Flowers (June-August) 4-5 mm across with 4 blunt, it; a short, white petals, not touching each other. Pod plump, about 5 mm broad and almost equally long, with provate H seam down the center, turning from green to yellow-brown, containing several rounded seeds. SPECIES: C. groenlandica and C. tridactylites are very similar and used identically. HABITAT: Open areas near the sea: beaches, tidal flats, rocky shores and slopes, sometimes tundra or street banks. Likes high nitrogen levels and therefore is more common where dead seaweeds get caught benied rocks, or near seabird colonies. Native. FOOD USE: Tender leaves and stems are eaten raw or cooked. They are excellent-like a slightly salty signny hot cabbage. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This dainty herb is credited with saving many sailors of yore from scurvy. It has been sometim cultivated as a vegetable. The genus name means "ear-shaped" in reference to the leaf. Leaf. stem. and DOC shape is highly variable. While the taxonomy with this genus remains unsettled, the group is very easy to recognize. The association with seabird colonies is dramatic-in some regions it is found nowher- except the heavy bird turd zones, and it grows much larger in these locations. 341 