mm
0
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
7
Field pennycress
1
2
Thlaspi arvense
Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
flowers, QUICK CHECK: unlobed Tall, narrow, strong-smelling, spring-blooming mustard with
stem leaves, and large, flat send pods. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: rosettes that wither Erect winter annual with a slightly unpleasant smell. Basal leaves
by flowering, the blades 1-3.5" (2.5-9 cm) long, obovate in dense
nearly round, hairless, the tips rounded, entire or with a few shallow, blunt, often or elliptic to
nipple-teeth. Midvein and major veins are slightly depressed above. Petioles winged, whitish
ally erect, widening roundish into the blade. Stems single or branching at the base, to 40" " m) tall gradu- and th
below the with numerous wing-ridges, 3 of them running down from each node, hairless. cm ck. straight
flowering top; form is taller than wide. Stem leaves alternate, ascending, over apping Branches care
(4-8 cm) long, lanceolate, clasping with pointed, ear-like lobes at the base, hairless. Secondary veins 1.3 flot
nearly so; the midvein is depressed. Margins curve downward with a few large, blunt teeth. Uppermost leaves or
are scattered, smaller, and more pointed with larger teeth. Inflorescence ascending racemes at the BOEX,
the rachis ridged; flowers in a tight cluster at the tip. Flowers tiny with four elliptic white petals that scarcely
spread open. Pod broad, flattened, almost round, winged, nearly the size of a dime (10-17 mm), notched at the D.
held ascending on a slightly ascending pedicel 1-2 times its ength
HABITAT: Rich disturbed ground, especially on heavy so:¹, with
lots of sun. Most commonly seen in agricultural fields, on roadsides
and in building sites
Introduced.
FOOD USE: Aliten-
der parts are edible,
but the leaves and
flower buds have a
very strong fiavor-
I remove them be-
fore cooking shoots
Seeds can be used
as a seasoning.
COMMENTS: con-
sider this a secona-
rate mustard.
Related edible:
8 Garlic pennycress
Thlaspi alliaceum
This is a recently established exotic weed that is
rapidly spreading; in many parts of our region it
IS now far more common than field pennycress.
Stems more slender and typically 10-30 (25-
75 cm) tall. They
are round. with
out wing-ridges:
near the base
Rapialy
they have long,
expanding.
soft, sparse hairs
do the leaves) but the upper stem
and (as leaves are hairless. Pods much
smaller than those of field pennycress
(4 (mm), and inflated. AKA Mum-
menhoffia alliaced.
343
mm 0 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 7 Field pennycress 1 2 Thlaspi arvense Brassicaceae (Mustard family) flowers, QUICK CHECK: unlobed Tall, narrow, strong-smelling, spring-blooming mustard with stem leaves, and large, flat send pods. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: rosettes that wither Erect winter annual with a slightly unpleasant smell. Basal leaves by flowering, the blades 1-3.5" (2.5-9 cm) long, obovate in dense nearly round, hairless, the tips rounded, entire or with a few shallow, blunt, often or elliptic to nipple-teeth. Midvein and major veins are slightly depressed above. Petioles winged, whitish ally erect, widening roundish into the blade. Stems single or branching at the base, to 40" " m) tall gradu- and th below the with numerous wing-ridges, 3 of them running down from each node, hairless. cm ck. straight flowering top; form is taller than wide. Stem leaves alternate, ascending, over apping Branches care (4-8 cm) long, lanceolate, clasping with pointed, ear-like lobes at the base, hairless. Secondary veins 1.3 flot nearly so; the midvein is depressed. Margins curve downward with a few large, blunt teeth. Uppermost leaves or are scattered, smaller, and more pointed with larger teeth. Inflorescence ascending racemes at the BOEX, the rachis ridged; flowers in a tight cluster at the tip. Flowers tiny with four elliptic white petals that scarcely spread open. Pod broad, flattened, almost round, winged, nearly the size of a dime (10-17 mm), notched at the D. held ascending on a slightly ascending pedicel 1-2 times its ength HABITAT: Rich disturbed ground, especially on heavy so:¹, with lots of sun. Most commonly seen in agricultural fields, on roadsides and in building sites Introduced. FOOD USE: Aliten- der parts are edible, but the leaves and flower buds have a very strong fiavor- I remove them be- fore cooking shoots Seeds can be used as a seasoning. COMMENTS: con- sider this a secona- rate mustard. Related edible: 8 Garlic pennycress Thlaspi alliaceum This is a recently established exotic weed that is rapidly spreading; in many parts of our region it IS now far more common than field pennycress. Stems more slender and typically 10-30 (25- 75 cm) tall. They are round. with out wing-ridges: near the base Rapialy they have long, expanding. soft, sparse hairs do the leaves) but the upper stem and (as leaves are hairless. Pods much smaller than those of field pennycress (4 (mm), and inflated. AKA Mum- menhoffia alliaced. 343 