BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
bittercress
2
III.
Cardamine Bulbous bulbosa Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
with erect, unbranched stem and broad lower ID leaves; difficulty upper 2.
leaves OUICK narrow, CHECK: sessile, Small with plant large teeth; 4-petaled white flowers in racemes.
Perennial herb from a white, amorphous, knobby tuber 8-15 mm across, in fall
DESCRIPTION: all sides, sometimes connected in short chains. Basal leaves appear mm)
with roots on through the winter, disappearing with flowering. They are 0.5-1.5" the (13-38 margin.
wide, obscure and flat on the upper surface. Petioles about twice the blade length, erect, thin, chan-
and persist hairless or nearly so, entire but with gentle indents where veins meet
neled, Veins mostly with scattered minute hairs. Stems often clustered (from adjacent tubers), 12-24" (30-60 The lower tall,
mm thick, the bases usually purple with very fine hairs; above that hairs are fewer and finer.
stem 1.5-3 is roundish, becoming angled higher up, with a flat area running down from each leaf axil. Branches rare;
if present they are strongly ascending. Stem leaves 4-8, widely spaced, 1.2-2.4" (3-6 cm) long, on short
petioles (becoming sessile upward), ovate to lanceolate, the veins mostly obscure (visible ones are faintly
depressed), the margins with 0-3 widely spaced teeth per side. Uppermost leaves are smaller, narrower,
sessile, with larger teeth or small lobes. Inflorescence terminal racemes 2-7" (5-18 cm) long, the flowers in a
round-topped bunch, the pedicels ascending. Much smaller racemes may grow on very low branches. Flow-
ers (spring to early summer) with 4 petals, white or rarely pink, 0.6-o.8" (15-20 mm) across. Pods ascending,
thin and rod-like, about 7" (2.5 cm) long, on a pedicel about the same length.
HABITAT: Low, muddy areas in shade or sun: edges of temporary pools in floodplain forests and low, rich woods,
swamps, seeps, fens,
marshes, pond mar-
gins. Native.
FOOD USE: The tu-
ber resides close
to the surface and
can be unearthed
by hand. All tender
parts above ground
can be eaten raw or
cooked. All parts have
a horseradish flavor.
Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: This
might be the showiest
of our bittercresses. It
thrives in cool weath-
er and grows larg-
en and lusher in the
South where winters
are mild and spring
lasts longer.
RELATED EDIBLES:
Other members of
the genus Cardamine
are edible and spicy,
with 0 horseradish
flavor, a few strong
ly resemble this one.
342
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED bittercress 2 III. Cardamine Bulbous bulbosa Brassicaceae (Mustard family) with erect, unbranched stem and broad lower ID leaves; difficulty upper 2. leaves OUICK narrow, CHECK: sessile, Small with plant large teeth; 4-petaled white flowers in racemes. Perennial herb from a white, amorphous, knobby tuber 8-15 mm across, in fall DESCRIPTION: all sides, sometimes connected in short chains. Basal leaves appear mm) with roots on through the winter, disappearing with flowering. They are 0.5-1.5" the (13-38 margin. wide, obscure and flat on the upper surface. Petioles about twice the blade length, erect, thin, chan- and persist hairless or nearly so, entire but with gentle indents where veins meet neled, Veins mostly with scattered minute hairs. Stems often clustered (from adjacent tubers), 12-24" (30-60 The lower tall, mm thick, the bases usually purple with very fine hairs; above that hairs are fewer and finer. stem 1.5-3 is roundish, becoming angled higher up, with a flat area running down from each leaf axil. Branches rare; if present they are strongly ascending. Stem leaves 4-8, widely spaced, 1.2-2.4" (3-6 cm) long, on short petioles (becoming sessile upward), ovate to lanceolate, the veins mostly obscure (visible ones are faintly depressed), the margins with 0-3 widely spaced teeth per side. Uppermost leaves are smaller, narrower, sessile, with larger teeth or small lobes. Inflorescence terminal racemes 2-7" (5-18 cm) long, the flowers in a round-topped bunch, the pedicels ascending. Much smaller racemes may grow on very low branches. Flow- ers (spring to early summer) with 4 petals, white or rarely pink, 0.6-o.8" (15-20 mm) across. Pods ascending, thin and rod-like, about 7" (2.5 cm) long, on a pedicel about the same length. HABITAT: Low, muddy areas in shade or sun: edges of temporary pools in floodplain forests and low, rich woods, swamps, seeps, fens, marshes, pond mar- gins. Native. FOOD USE: The tu- ber resides close to the surface and can be unearthed by hand. All tender parts above ground can be eaten raw or cooked. All parts have a horseradish flavor. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: This might be the showiest of our bittercresses. It thrives in cool weath- er and grows larg- en and lusher in the South where winters are mild and spring lasts longer. RELATED EDIBLES: Other members of the genus Cardamine are edible and spicy, with 0 horseradish flavor, a few strong ly resemble this one. 342 