BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
Armoracia Horseradish rusticana 2 Brassicaceae 2 (Mustard family)
Thick champs of large, erect, irregularly toothed or scalloped, difficulty 1. dock-like
OUTCK leaves on CHECK long petioles; tall stalk with racemes of white flowers. ID
Perennial plant from a large multi-crowned taproot or taproot ovate cluster, to
DESCRIPTION: rosettes. Basal leaves 8-30" (20-90 cm) long, hairless, dock leaves),
with multiple narrowly adjacent oblanceolate, often curly (with much longer waves than broad, white,
oblong rounded or or blunt, the base gently tapered into the petiole. Midvein
the tip protruding and rounded below. Secondary veins numerous, prominent,
and flat above, to the midvein, flat or raised above and protruding below, running straight halfway sized, to the rounded edge,
then white, forking, 65-85° the branches looping to meet the next vein. Margins scalloped with irregularly of blade
teeth. Some basal or lower stem leaves are deeply pinnately lobed with very thin lobes. Petioles 70-110%
length, solid, hairless, broadly and shallowly channeled. Stalks 2-5' (60-150 cm) tall and 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm)
thick, single or multiple, erect, solid, roundish but ridged, hairless, thick, branched only in the inflorescence;
usually emanating where rosette leaves are small or absent. Stem leaves similar to the basal but narrower; the
uppermost and those in the inflorescence are linear and often nearly entire. Inflorescence a large panicle of
numerous ascending racemes, the flowers crowded at the tip. Flowers 11-13 mm across with 4 blunt, white
petals, wrinkly and overlapping at the base. Pods tiny, 2-3 mm long, plump, slightly flattened, on a thin, almost
appressed pedicel-the fruit often falling off and not maturing.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Dock (p. 323) leaves lack teeth and their veins are not white.
HABITAT: An escape from cultivation persisting and spreading on roadsides and in old fields; usually near
old homesteads. Intolerant of shade.
FOOD USE: Young leaves and shoots in spring and early summer can be eaten raw or used as a potherb.
More often, sections of root are peeled and blended or grated as a seasoning. The root can be collected at
any time, but is best when the plant is dormant.
COMMENTS: This is exactly the same as cultivated horseradish. While not generally abundant, horseradish
survives and spreads at homestead sites and is found as scattered robust colonies or individual plants. To the
untrained eye, a patch of horseradish looks like an overgrown dock colony.
344
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED Armoracia Horseradish rusticana 2 Brassicaceae 2 (Mustard family) Thick champs of large, erect, irregularly toothed or scalloped, difficulty 1. dock-like OUTCK leaves on CHECK long petioles; tall stalk with racemes of white flowers. ID Perennial plant from a large multi-crowned taproot or taproot ovate cluster, to DESCRIPTION: rosettes. Basal leaves 8-30" (20-90 cm) long, hairless, dock leaves), with multiple narrowly adjacent oblanceolate, often curly (with much longer waves than broad, white, oblong rounded or or blunt, the base gently tapered into the petiole. Midvein the tip protruding and rounded below. Secondary veins numerous, prominent, and flat above, to the midvein, flat or raised above and protruding below, running straight halfway sized, to the rounded edge, then white, forking, 65-85° the branches looping to meet the next vein. Margins scalloped with irregularly of blade teeth. Some basal or lower stem leaves are deeply pinnately lobed with very thin lobes. Petioles 70-110% length, solid, hairless, broadly and shallowly channeled. Stalks 2-5' (60-150 cm) tall and 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm) thick, single or multiple, erect, solid, roundish but ridged, hairless, thick, branched only in the inflorescence; usually emanating where rosette leaves are small or absent. Stem leaves similar to the basal but narrower; the uppermost and those in the inflorescence are linear and often nearly entire. Inflorescence a large panicle of numerous ascending racemes, the flowers crowded at the tip. Flowers 11-13 mm across with 4 blunt, white petals, wrinkly and overlapping at the base. Pods tiny, 2-3 mm long, plump, slightly flattened, on a thin, almost appressed pedicel-the fruit often falling off and not maturing. CONFUSING PLANTS: Dock (p. 323) leaves lack teeth and their veins are not white. HABITAT: An escape from cultivation persisting and spreading on roadsides and in old fields; usually near old homesteads. Intolerant of shade. FOOD USE: Young leaves and shoots in spring and early summer can be eaten raw or used as a potherb. More often, sections of root are peeled and blended or grated as a seasoning. The root can be collected at any time, but is best when the plant is dormant. COMMENTS: This is exactly the same as cultivated horseradish. While not generally abundant, horseradish survives and spreads at homestead sites and is found as scattered robust colonies or individual plants. To the untrained eye, a patch of horseradish looks like an overgrown dock colony. 344 