BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
10 Smooth rock cress
2
Boechera laevigata Brassicaceae 322 (Mustard family)
QUICK sharp teeth; CHECK: Basal rosette of tough, dark green, lance
narrow. ID difficulty stem leaves 2. similar but thinner, sessile, and light
ing DESCRIPTION: leaves Biennial mustard with a basal rosette producing leaf
dark-green evergreen, with short narrowly hairs elliptic, tough and leathery, glossy, 2 15-6" forms. Overwinter-
They are borne from raised bumps on the upper surface, often (4-15 cm) long,
ter leaves) have on sharp, short large, petioles and may have a few small lobes or divisions purplish near below. the base.
are similar but long, layered directly on top of the overwintering leaves between them Spring basal
leaves 3-9" (8-23 cm) upturned, well-spaced teeth with small bristles Margins (yre
of winter leaves. more elongated, sessile, and green on both sides-lacking the hairs, as raised the stem appears
round, less than Margins (spring leaves) have long, sharp teeth. Stems glaucous, bumps. and
erect. Stem leaves 0.7" (18 mm) thick, up to 38" (Im) tall, unbranched or sparsely branched, gray-green. hairless.
the clasping with 2 lobes at the base, elongated and tapered very gradually, usually sing end
surface curvy, tip sharp. The blade is creased near the base but the midvein is essentially flat arching above or droobles,
is hairless with a light bloom. Margins (stem leaves) wavy near the base becoming The plack
toothed toward the tip. Upper leaves are linear, 1-2 mm wide, with few to no teeth. Inflorescence erratically slongards, share
terminal racemes, lax and nodding, all parts smooth and hairless, the branches and pedicels divergir
very narrow angles. Flowers (late spring to early summer) not showy, 5-6 mm long, not spreading open
4 petals and 4 sepals of equal length. Sepals are narrow, pointed, and greenish; petals are creamy. Pod
thin, flat, curving, to 4" (10 cm) long, filled with tiny, oblong, winged seeds.
HABITAT: Well-drained hardwood forests with canopy openings and disturbances such as logging, windin
flood, or construction. More common in hilly, mountainous, or rocky terrain, or poor sandy soll-often
trails or roadsides. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender spring
leaves, shoots, and flower
buds can be eaten raw
cooked. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This is
good, mild-flavored, native
mustard that is hardly known
as a food plant. The overwine
tering rosette is attractive
and unmistakable. but the
evergreen basal leaves are
hardly worth eating. How
ever, the new spring resette
leaves are good, and some
times very hot. AKA Arabis
laevigata.
RELATED EDIBLES: Oth-
er members of the genus
Boechera are edible 8. a
nadensis is very similar en
appearance out has lorger
drooping pods and non
clasping leaves B
riense has leaves with much
more prominent teeth that
are more numerous 30 the
stem. There are several
more in our area.
345
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 10 Smooth rock cress 2 Boechera laevigata Brassicaceae 322 (Mustard family) QUICK sharp teeth; CHECK: Basal rosette of tough, dark green, lance narrow. ID difficulty stem leaves 2. similar but thinner, sessile, and light ing DESCRIPTION: leaves Biennial mustard with a basal rosette producing leaf dark-green evergreen, with short narrowly hairs elliptic, tough and leathery, glossy, 2 15-6" forms. Overwinter- They are borne from raised bumps on the upper surface, often (4-15 cm) long, ter leaves) have on sharp, short large, petioles and may have a few small lobes or divisions purplish near below. the base. are similar but long, layered directly on top of the overwintering leaves between them Spring basal leaves 3-9" (8-23 cm) upturned, well-spaced teeth with small bristles Margins (yre of winter leaves. more elongated, sessile, and green on both sides-lacking the hairs, as raised the stem appears round, less than Margins (spring leaves) have long, sharp teeth. Stems glaucous, bumps. and erect. Stem leaves 0.7" (18 mm) thick, up to 38" (Im) tall, unbranched or sparsely branched, gray-green. hairless. the clasping with 2 lobes at the base, elongated and tapered very gradually, usually sing end surface curvy, tip sharp. The blade is creased near the base but the midvein is essentially flat arching above or droobles, is hairless with a light bloom. Margins (stem leaves) wavy near the base becoming The plack toothed toward the tip. Upper leaves are linear, 1-2 mm wide, with few to no teeth. Inflorescence erratically slongards, share terminal racemes, lax and nodding, all parts smooth and hairless, the branches and pedicels divergir very narrow angles. Flowers (late spring to early summer) not showy, 5-6 mm long, not spreading open 4 petals and 4 sepals of equal length. Sepals are narrow, pointed, and greenish; petals are creamy. Pod thin, flat, curving, to 4" (10 cm) long, filled with tiny, oblong, winged seeds. HABITAT: Well-drained hardwood forests with canopy openings and disturbances such as logging, windin flood, or construction. More common in hilly, mountainous, or rocky terrain, or poor sandy soll-often trails or roadsides. Native. FOOD USE: Tender spring leaves, shoots, and flower buds can be eaten raw cooked. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This is good, mild-flavored, native mustard that is hardly known as a food plant. The overwine tering rosette is attractive and unmistakable. but the evergreen basal leaves are hardly worth eating. How ever, the new spring resette leaves are good, and some times very hot. AKA Arabis laevigata. RELATED EDIBLES: Oth- er members of the genus Boechera are edible 8. a nadensis is very similar en appearance out has lorger drooping pods and non clasping leaves B riense has leaves with much more prominent teeth that are more numerous 30 the stem. There are several more in our area. 345 