BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
2
3
Hesperis Dame's rocket matronalis 2 Brassicaceae 3 (Mustard family)
CHECK: Colonial herb with erect, chest-high stems unbranched and long, below thin the pods. top,
toothed QUICK hairv leaves, racemes of 4-petaled pink-purple flowers
ID difficulty 2.
Perennial herb spreading by rhizomes. Basal rosettes prominent in autumn to 12"
DESCRIPTION: the leaves mostly erect, long-elliptic, tapered at the base, blunt-tipped, the margins
(30 cm) with long, few teeth, occasionally lobed near the base. Petioles of basal leaves 30-80% below, of solid, blade length,
and winter, with appressed hairs above, fewer below (and mostly on veins),
wavy U-channeled a with the channel margins widening distally into leafy wings, rounded Stems 3-5 mm
thick. deeply A new flush of basal leaves appears in spring but these disappear before flowering. single or in
small clumps, 3-5' (90-150 tall and 6-10 mm thick, erect and straight, roundish but faintly ridged, solid
becoming pithy inside, gray-green from a dense layer of short hairs. Branches numerous, minor, only in the
upper third, strongly ascending, terminating in an inflorescence. Stem leaves numerous, alternate, overlap-
ping, lanceolate with the tip tapered to a point, 2-9" (5-23 cm) long, shorter toward the top, on short petioles
reducing to sessile on the upper stem. Margins have sparse, small teeth pointing outward. Midvein whitish
and depressed above, protruding and green below; the blade is often creased along it. Secondary veins are
faint and faintly depressed. Inflorescence showy terminal racemes to 8" (20 cm) long, each flower on a pedi-
cel about 1 cm. Flowers 0.8-1.2" (2-3 cm) across with 4 purple or pink (occasionally white), obovate petals.
Stamens and styles are nestled deep in the flower tube and mostly concealed. Pods 2.2-4" (5.5-10 cm) long,
2-3 mm wide, ascending, not tapered or flattened, constricted between seeds, 4-ridged; the seeds elliptic.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Phloxes have 5 petals and paired leaves with no teeth.
HABITAT: Forest borders, roadsides, old homesteads, woodlots, open
woods-generally in rich but well-drained soil in full sun to moderate
shade. Introduced I
FOOD USE: The large winter leaves persist through hard frost and make
a nice potherb when few are available, but they are not as good as the
spring leaves. In late spring the shoots make an okay vegetable raw and
an excellent one cooked. Use any tender greens at the shoot top before
flowering. Flower buds are okay; flowers have a slightly sweet-hot flavor
and add beautiful color to food.
COMMENTS: A common, attractive, invasive flower of open areas and
forest margins, this plant was introduced in flower gardens and has
mustard widely. Although not much touted in the wild food literature, it is escaped a good
for eating, with a surprisingly mild flavor.
346
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 2 3 Hesperis Dame's rocket matronalis 2 Brassicaceae 3 (Mustard family) CHECK: Colonial herb with erect, chest-high stems unbranched and long, below thin the pods. top, toothed QUICK hairv leaves, racemes of 4-petaled pink-purple flowers ID difficulty 2. Perennial herb spreading by rhizomes. Basal rosettes prominent in autumn to 12" DESCRIPTION: the leaves mostly erect, long-elliptic, tapered at the base, blunt-tipped, the margins (30 cm) with long, few teeth, occasionally lobed near the base. Petioles of basal leaves 30-80% below, of solid, blade length, and winter, with appressed hairs above, fewer below (and mostly on veins), wavy U-channeled a with the channel margins widening distally into leafy wings, rounded Stems 3-5 mm thick. deeply A new flush of basal leaves appears in spring but these disappear before flowering. single or in small clumps, 3-5' (90-150 tall and 6-10 mm thick, erect and straight, roundish but faintly ridged, solid becoming pithy inside, gray-green from a dense layer of short hairs. Branches numerous, minor, only in the upper third, strongly ascending, terminating in an inflorescence. Stem leaves numerous, alternate, overlap- ping, lanceolate with the tip tapered to a point, 2-9" (5-23 cm) long, shorter toward the top, on short petioles reducing to sessile on the upper stem. Margins have sparse, small teeth pointing outward. Midvein whitish and depressed above, protruding and green below; the blade is often creased along it. Secondary veins are faint and faintly depressed. Inflorescence showy terminal racemes to 8" (20 cm) long, each flower on a pedi- cel about 1 cm. Flowers 0.8-1.2" (2-3 cm) across with 4 purple or pink (occasionally white), obovate petals. Stamens and styles are nestled deep in the flower tube and mostly concealed. Pods 2.2-4" (5.5-10 cm) long, 2-3 mm wide, ascending, not tapered or flattened, constricted between seeds, 4-ridged; the seeds elliptic. CONFUSING PLANTS: Phloxes have 5 petals and paired leaves with no teeth. HABITAT: Forest borders, roadsides, old homesteads, woodlots, open woods-generally in rich but well-drained soil in full sun to moderate shade. Introduced I FOOD USE: The large winter leaves persist through hard frost and make a nice potherb when few are available, but they are not as good as the spring leaves. In late spring the shoots make an okay vegetable raw and an excellent one cooked. Use any tender greens at the shoot top before flowering. Flower buds are okay; flowers have a slightly sweet-hot flavor and add beautiful color to food. COMMENTS: A common, attractive, invasive flower of open areas and forest margins, this plant was introduced in flower gardens and has mustard widely. Although not much touted in the wild food literature, it is escaped a good for eating, with a surprisingly mild flavor. 346 