1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
Whitetop
2
1
Cardaria draba Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
CHECK: of white Hairy colonial mustard with grayish
RIPTION: flowers in spring, and plump, heart shaped leaves nods and stems. ID
eaves Perennial from a root system that spreads difficulty 2.
acute and at the lower base, stem blunt leaves are elliptic to obovate, 1-3" (2.5 laterally 8cm) to form colonies
and often indented at the long, flat. flesny,
hair. above They and wither flat about flowering time. Veins offset tip, by light both color. sides flat densely coated
length, or scarcely protruding below. Petioles of lower or scarrely
broad and nearly flat on top, D-shaped below. Stems erect leaves and up to 150%
M
but multiple and leaning without, 12-28" (30-70cm) tall and 7-11 mm single with
abundant
alternate, slightly angled, the color uniform gray-green, densely soft-hairy, branched thick, solid, Mestinard
and elliptic with blunt tips and scattered blunt teeth, with the veins more classing near
eaves per leaves are held erect and appressed on progressively shorter petioles-sessile only and in the UPDER jar ha
protruding below. Inflorescence multiple racemes, at first compact with flowers strongly depressed
several adjacent clusters about the same level, giving a flat-topped appearance in bloom. crowded The at NO the it.
often show even in the bud stage. During and after flowering the racemes lengthen a little and the
ngled, straight pedicels lengthen a lot (ultimately becoming 3-5 times as long as the flower), resulting
crowded cluster where the members of adjacent racemes mingle. Flowers 6-10 mm across with iou: ``
obovate, widely spaced, white petals, not held at right angles to each other. Pods short, plump, ippsici :
heart-shaped. WITH
line dividing them
into two ur equal
"halves."
HABITAT: Dis.
turbed sunny areas
with well-dra. ned
soil, fields. roadsides
vacant lots, pastures
Introduced.
FOOD USE: Tender
new shoots. leafy
tops and flower
bud clusters (spring)
can be used raw or
cooked like a strong
broccoli.
COMMENTS: One
of the most coin-
mon weedy mus
tards of urban areas
in the High Plains
whitetop can orten
be oliected in great
quantity with little
effort. Some other
mustands are also
sometimes called
whitetop. AKALeD
divin diaba hear
cress heart pod
hoary cress
347
1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED Whitetop 2 1 Cardaria draba Brassicaceae (Mustard family) CHECK: of white Hairy colonial mustard with grayish RIPTION: flowers in spring, and plump, heart shaped leaves nods and stems. ID eaves Perennial from a root system that spreads difficulty 2. acute and at the lower base, stem blunt leaves are elliptic to obovate, 1-3" (2.5 laterally 8cm) to form colonies and often indented at the long, flat. flesny, hair. above They and wither flat about flowering time. Veins offset tip, by light both color. sides flat densely coated length, or scarcely protruding below. Petioles of lower or scarrely broad and nearly flat on top, D-shaped below. Stems erect leaves and up to 150% M but multiple and leaning without, 12-28" (30-70cm) tall and 7-11 mm single with abundant alternate, slightly angled, the color uniform gray-green, densely soft-hairy, branched thick, solid, Mestinard and elliptic with blunt tips and scattered blunt teeth, with the veins more classing near eaves per leaves are held erect and appressed on progressively shorter petioles-sessile only and in the UPDER jar ha protruding below. Inflorescence multiple racemes, at first compact with flowers strongly depressed several adjacent clusters about the same level, giving a flat-topped appearance in bloom. crowded The at NO the it. often show even in the bud stage. During and after flowering the racemes lengthen a little and the ngled, straight pedicels lengthen a lot (ultimately becoming 3-5 times as long as the flower), resulting crowded cluster where the members of adjacent racemes mingle. Flowers 6-10 mm across with iou: `` obovate, widely spaced, white petals, not held at right angles to each other. Pods short, plump, ippsici : heart-shaped. WITH line dividing them into two ur equal "halves." HABITAT: Dis. turbed sunny areas with well-dra. ned soil, fields. roadsides vacant lots, pastures Introduced. FOOD USE: Tender new shoots. leafy tops and flower bud clusters (spring) can be used raw or cooked like a strong broccoli. COMMENTS: One of the most coin- mon weedy mus tards of urban areas in the High Plains whitetop can orten be oliected in great quantity with little effort. Some other mustands are also sometimes called whitetop. AKALeD divin diaba hear cress heart pod hoary cress 347 