0
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
14 Rattlesnake master
2
Eryngium
yuccifolium
Apiaceae
(Carrot
family)
ball-like of tiny pale flowers. ID difficulty 1.
UICK CHECK: clusters Long, stiff, sharp-tipped, yucca-like leaves with spiny-toothed margins
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a multi-headed knobby root mass. Basal leaves
like, resembling grass or yucca leaves, linear, stiff and leathery, often U-channeled strap-
keeled or folded, erect to ascending, 1-3' (30-90 cm) long and 0.6-1.5" (1.5-4 cm) but wide, not
sides. sessile, needle-tipped, the surface hairless and strongly glaucous. Veins parallel and flat or
Margins have widely spaced, long, sharp, semi-stiff bristle teeth. Stems single per crown but nearly often so on both
because crowns are usually packed together, 2-5' (60-150 cm) tall and 0.3-0.6" (8-15 mm) thick, erect. crowded round,
hollow with thick walls, jointed, simple or few-branched in the upper third, the surface hairless, smooth, and
glaucous. Stem leaves alternate, clasping, few per stalk and
widely spaced, vertical, similar to basal leaves but progres-
sively smaller upward. Inflorescence few to several densely
packed heads (compact umbels) in an irregularly forking or
umbel-like cluster at the apex. Heads 0.4-1" (1-2.5 long,
ball or egg-shaped, pale, containing numerous flowers. spixy
from a stiff bract beneath each flower. There are long. stiff
bracts at the inflorescence junctures, and a whorl of 5-10
smaller bracts beneath most heads. Flowers (mid to 1933
summer) 2-3 mm wide with 5 white to faintly greenish. oblong.
blunt petals, not spreading widely; sexual parts protrude wes
beyond the petals. Fruit an angled schizocarp 5-7 mm long
that splits in two at maturity.
HABITAT: Tallgrass prairies and rich-soiled savannahs: now
mostly on roadsides and rocky ridges or slopes. Often planted
ornamentally. Native.
FOOD USE: The tender bases of young shoots can be eaten
in late spring, raw or cooked. You may want to peel them.
Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: This plant
has been used medicinal-
ly for many purposes-
including as a snakebite
remedy. hence the name.
The genus contains many
species, some of which
are traditional vegeta-
bles or flavorings in var-
ious parts of the world.
While our other species
are probably safe. this is
the only one that 1 have
eaten on multiple occa-
sions. Like other tailgrass
prairie plants. it has suf-
fered greatly from hab
itat loss. A relative,
E. leavenworthii lacks a
common name despite
being arguably the most
strikingly beautiful Check North
American
plant
it out
349
0 BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 14 Rattlesnake master 2 Eryngium yuccifolium Apiaceae (Carrot family) ball-like of tiny pale flowers. ID difficulty 1. UICK CHECK: clusters Long, stiff, sharp-tipped, yucca-like leaves with spiny-toothed margins DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a multi-headed knobby root mass. Basal leaves like, resembling grass or yucca leaves, linear, stiff and leathery, often U-channeled strap- keeled or folded, erect to ascending, 1-3' (30-90 cm) long and 0.6-1.5" (1.5-4 cm) but wide, not sides. sessile, needle-tipped, the surface hairless and strongly glaucous. Veins parallel and flat or Margins have widely spaced, long, sharp, semi-stiff bristle teeth. Stems single per crown but nearly often so on both because crowns are usually packed together, 2-5' (60-150 cm) tall and 0.3-0.6" (8-15 mm) thick, erect. crowded round, hollow with thick walls, jointed, simple or few-branched in the upper third, the surface hairless, smooth, and glaucous. Stem leaves alternate, clasping, few per stalk and widely spaced, vertical, similar to basal leaves but progres- sively smaller upward. Inflorescence few to several densely packed heads (compact umbels) in an irregularly forking or umbel-like cluster at the apex. Heads 0.4-1" (1-2.5 long, ball or egg-shaped, pale, containing numerous flowers. spixy from a stiff bract beneath each flower. There are long. stiff bracts at the inflorescence junctures, and a whorl of 5-10 smaller bracts beneath most heads. Flowers (mid to 1933 summer) 2-3 mm wide with 5 white to faintly greenish. oblong. blunt petals, not spreading widely; sexual parts protrude wes beyond the petals. Fruit an angled schizocarp 5-7 mm long that splits in two at maturity. HABITAT: Tallgrass prairies and rich-soiled savannahs: now mostly on roadsides and rocky ridges or slopes. Often planted ornamentally. Native. FOOD USE: The tender bases of young shoots can be eaten in late spring, raw or cooked. You may want to peel them. Conservation 3. COMMENTS: This plant has been used medicinal- ly for many purposes- including as a snakebite remedy. hence the name. The genus contains many species, some of which are traditional vegeta- bles or flavorings in var- ious parts of the world. While our other species are probably safe. this is the only one that 1 have eaten on multiple occa- sions. Like other tailgrass prairie plants. it has suf- fered greatly from hab itat loss. A relative, E. leavenworthii lacks a common name despite being arguably the most strikingly beautiful Check North American plant it out 349 