BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
Garlic mustard
3
1
1
NG-250
Alliaria petiolata Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
QUICK CHECK Deeply toothed, triangular stem leaves with hairy petioles and ga
odor: broad hidney shaped basal leaves ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Biennial from a small, branching, whitish taproot. The scent of vegetat
parts is pungent with an overtone of garlic. Basal leaves in a rosette of 3-7, kidney-shap
to rounded with overlapping basal lobes, 1,5-3.5" (4-9 cm) wide, hairless above with lo
soft, sparse hairs below. There are 4-6 major secondary veins from the base. Veins and
that is deeply and narrowly depressed above and protruding below. Margins have lon
pointing teeth, each with a light, downcurved tip. Petioles reddish to green, up to four ti
on basal and lower stem leaves, shallowly channeled, hairy along the upper channel n
multiple, straight, purple at the base, erect, 18-40" (0.5-1 m) tall and 5-10 mm thick,
solid when young (pithy at maturity), smooth with a light bloom and long, scattered, Si
the base. Branches only near the apex, ascending, terminating in an inflorescence. :
heart-shaped to triangular with an elongated tip, on progressively shorter petioles, the
and more pointed on upper leaves. Inflorescence multiple terminal racemes, at first
and buds at the tip, later elongating to 8-12" (20-30 cm) with well-spaced pedicels. FI
with 4 blunt, white, spreading petals. Pods 1-2.3" (2.5-6 long, rod-like, curving upv
of equal thickness.
HABITAT: Hardwood forests with rich soil, especially
in hurnan-altered landscapes. I
FOOD USE: Roots are horseradishy but small and tough.
Tender leaves can be used at any time, but more for
seasoning than bulk. Shoots, before the flowers have
opened in mid spring, are the mildest part of the plant
and can be used raw in salads, cooked in soups or stir-fry,
or steamed like asparagus.
COMMENTS: This weed is one of the most destructive
invasive plants in eastern North America. It sometimes
takes over woodlands and kills off 90% of all other herba-
ceous plants, forming a near monoculture through com-
petitive exclusion and allelopathic chemicals. According
to Dr. John Kallas, it is also one of the most nutrient-dense
foods known.
Shoot at the optimum stage for eating.
348
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED Garlic mustard 3 1 1 NG-250 Alliaria petiolata Brassicaceae (Mustard family) QUICK CHECK Deeply toothed, triangular stem leaves with hairy petioles and ga odor: broad hidney shaped basal leaves ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Biennial from a small, branching, whitish taproot. The scent of vegetat parts is pungent with an overtone of garlic. Basal leaves in a rosette of 3-7, kidney-shap to rounded with overlapping basal lobes, 1,5-3.5" (4-9 cm) wide, hairless above with lo soft, sparse hairs below. There are 4-6 major secondary veins from the base. Veins and that is deeply and narrowly depressed above and protruding below. Margins have lon pointing teeth, each with a light, downcurved tip. Petioles reddish to green, up to four ti on basal and lower stem leaves, shallowly channeled, hairy along the upper channel n multiple, straight, purple at the base, erect, 18-40" (0.5-1 m) tall and 5-10 mm thick, solid when young (pithy at maturity), smooth with a light bloom and long, scattered, Si the base. Branches only near the apex, ascending, terminating in an inflorescence. : heart-shaped to triangular with an elongated tip, on progressively shorter petioles, the and more pointed on upper leaves. Inflorescence multiple terminal racemes, at first and buds at the tip, later elongating to 8-12" (20-30 cm) with well-spaced pedicels. FI with 4 blunt, white, spreading petals. Pods 1-2.3" (2.5-6 long, rod-like, curving upv of equal thickness. HABITAT: Hardwood forests with rich soil, especially in hurnan-altered landscapes. I FOOD USE: Roots are horseradishy but small and tough. Tender leaves can be used at any time, but more for seasoning than bulk. Shoots, before the flowers have opened in mid spring, are the mildest part of the plant and can be used raw in salads, cooked in soups or stir-fry, or steamed like asparagus. COMMENTS: This weed is one of the most destructive invasive plants in eastern North America. It sometimes takes over woodlands and kills off 90% of all other herba- ceous plants, forming a near monoculture through com- petitive exclusion and allelopathic chemicals. According to Dr. John Kallas, it is also one of the most nutrient-dense foods known. Shoot at the optimum stage for eating. 348 