num
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
6 Evening primrose
2
Oenothera biennis
family
Onagraceae
QUICK unbranched, CHECK: Numerous long-lanceolate leaves FH-274
DESCRIPTION: and erect; raceme of large 4 petaled with yellow whitish Bowers midusin
ground, that disappear Biennial with a rosette of numerous layered ID difficulty 2.
9" (23 cm) long, by flowering. Basal leaves narrowly leaves, often hugging the
straight, erect hairs decurrent or tapered to the base, the tip abruptly elliptic to oblanceolate. UD to
flat to slightly raised on above both sides. Midvein prominently offset by whitish blunt-pointed, or with soft,
the midvein, arching and protruding below. Major secondary light red color
on the upper side (the toward the tip, almost reaching the margin, each veins 11-15 per side, often tish
or with widely blade is raised between them giving a rippled look), vein flat at the bottom of abroad valley
it is hard to scattered, broad, shallow, nipple-tipped teeth. Petioles Margins sometimes Mary, entire
side bluntly say keeled. where Stems the petiole ends and the blade begins), broadly winged, and shallowly 10-40% of made length ni (but
growing from red and 0.4-0.7" (10-18 mm) thick, sparsely coated with long, straight, erect pithy, unbranched 4-7
(1.2-2.1 m) tall single, erect, stiff, straight, round, solid at first becoming channeled. the under-
base, sessile bumps. Stem leaves alternate, numerous, 3-6" (8-15 cm) long, on short hairs, some of them
near the top. Inflorescence a terminal spike to 28" (70 cm) long, the rachis angled, petioles flowers near oorne the
singly in the axil of a bract. Flowers (mid merio
early fall) with an enlarged green base 0.6' (15 mr.
long, narrowing to a yellow tube 3-4 mm wide and
1.5-2" (4-5 cm) long. At the end of the tube are 'in
ear, canoe-shaped, recurved, claw-tipped dull yello
sepals about 1" (2.5 cm) long. Petals 4. broad-tioped
shallowly notched, bright yellow, overlapping scardely
if at all when fully open and spread about 1.5 14cm,
wide. There are 8 stamens and the pistils splitante 4
parts; the sexual parts are all yellow. Flowers oper IN
the evening and close the following morning. Fruit an
ascending, cylindrical, slightly tapered, 4-section pod
0.8" (2 cm) long, the tip truncated and depressed.
splitting open after maturity with recurved opes
to release numerous tiny, brown, elongated seeds.
(Continued on the next page.)
351
Fall rosette.
num 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 6 Evening primrose 2 Oenothera biennis family Onagraceae QUICK unbranched, CHECK: Numerous long-lanceolate leaves FH-274 DESCRIPTION: and erect; raceme of large 4 petaled with yellow whitish Bowers midusin ground, that disappear Biennial with a rosette of numerous layered ID difficulty 2. 9" (23 cm) long, by flowering. Basal leaves narrowly leaves, often hugging the straight, erect hairs decurrent or tapered to the base, the tip abruptly elliptic to oblanceolate. UD to flat to slightly raised on above both sides. Midvein prominently offset by whitish blunt-pointed, or with soft, the midvein, arching and protruding below. Major secondary light red color on the upper side (the toward the tip, almost reaching the margin, each veins 11-15 per side, often tish or with widely blade is raised between them giving a rippled look), vein flat at the bottom of abroad valley it is hard to scattered, broad, shallow, nipple-tipped teeth. Petioles Margins sometimes Mary, entire side bluntly say keeled. where Stems the petiole ends and the blade begins), broadly winged, and shallowly 10-40% of made length ni (but growing from red and 0.4-0.7" (10-18 mm) thick, sparsely coated with long, straight, erect pithy, unbranched 4-7 (1.2-2.1 m) tall single, erect, stiff, straight, round, solid at first becoming channeled. the under- base, sessile bumps. Stem leaves alternate, numerous, 3-6" (8-15 cm) long, on short hairs, some of them near the top. Inflorescence a terminal spike to 28" (70 cm) long, the rachis angled, petioles flowers near oorne the singly in the axil of a bract. Flowers (mid merio early fall) with an enlarged green base 0.6' (15 mr. long, narrowing to a yellow tube 3-4 mm wide and 1.5-2" (4-5 cm) long. At the end of the tube are 'in ear, canoe-shaped, recurved, claw-tipped dull yello sepals about 1" (2.5 cm) long. Petals 4. broad-tioped shallowly notched, bright yellow, overlapping scardely if at all when fully open and spread about 1.5 14cm, wide. There are 8 stamens and the pistils splitante 4 parts; the sexual parts are all yellow. Flowers oper IN the evening and close the following morning. Fruit an ascending, cylindrical, slightly tapered, 4-section pod 0.8" (2 cm) long, the tip truncated and depressed. splitting open after maturity with recurved opes to release numerous tiny, brown, elongated seeds. (Continued on the next page.) 351 Fall rosette. 