BASAL
LEAVES
PRESENT,
3
3
9
IWE-357
15 Strawberry spinach capitatum
family
Amaranthaceae
Chenopodium CHECK: Triangular or arrowhead-shaped basal leaves on long, flimsy petioles;
fleshy, red, winter annual. Basal leaves in a rosette arrowhead of 7-15, shaped, laying
QUICK glob-like clusters of fruit. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Weedy annual or 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, triangular or pointed but not
on the ground or weakly light green, ascending, thin, hairless, smooth but not glossy, the tip below; veinlets
sharp. somewhat Midvein ruffled, and major Margins veins entire lightly on depressed smaller leaves, above the and larger protruding ones 100-180% wavy or of with blade a few length. large, Stems scattered, erect,
outward-pointing teeth. Petioles long, thin, the flimsy, base, solid, hairless, ridged, zigzag, 12-28" (30-70 interrupted spikes
are mostly obscure. shallowly channeled, cm) tall. Stem
leaning, or prostrate, on shorter branching petioles, mostly otherwise at similar to basal. Inflorescence with terminal no petals, the parts hard to
of dense, ball-like As mature, the sepals expand and become juicy and deep red, crowding feature-while fruiting
leaves alternate, clusters. Flowers (mid summer to fall) tiny and unshowy together. The seeds
distinguish. ripen inside of these they red, strawberry-like balls, which are the plant's most distinctive
it is virtually unmistakable. The stems droop under their weight.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Maple-leaved goosefoot (p. 634) lacks basal leaves.
HABITAT: Forests on poor soil that have been disturbed through logging, fire, flood, windstorms, or construc-
tion. Also, clearings and roadsides in such forests. Occasion-
ally becomes an agricultural weed. Native.
FOOD USE: From early summer through early fall the greens
can be used raw or cooked. The juicy, red fruit/flower clusters
are mildly sweet and make an attractive addition to salads or
cooked vegetable dishes, or a fun snack. They can be eaten raw
or cooked-the taste is like sweet, juicy beets. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is an iconic yet exotic wild edible of our
northern forests. The red "berries" are often dismissed as
"flavorless" because they don't taste like strawberries, but
I think they're delicious. The seeds can remain dormant for
centuries in the soil, only germinating after a fire or other
catastrophe, making its abundance fleeting. This species
is sometimes sold in seed catalogs. AKA strawberry blite.
350
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, 3 3 9 IWE-357 15 Strawberry spinach capitatum family Amaranthaceae Chenopodium CHECK: Triangular or arrowhead-shaped basal leaves on long, flimsy petioles; fleshy, red, winter annual. Basal leaves in a rosette arrowhead of 7-15, shaped, laying QUICK glob-like clusters of fruit. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Weedy annual or 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, triangular or pointed but not on the ground or weakly light green, ascending, thin, hairless, smooth but not glossy, the tip below; veinlets sharp. somewhat Midvein ruffled, and major Margins veins entire lightly on depressed smaller leaves, above the and larger protruding ones 100-180% wavy or of with blade a few length. large, Stems scattered, erect, outward-pointing teeth. Petioles long, thin, the flimsy, base, solid, hairless, ridged, zigzag, 12-28" (30-70 interrupted spikes are mostly obscure. shallowly channeled, cm) tall. Stem leaning, or prostrate, on shorter branching petioles, mostly otherwise at similar to basal. Inflorescence with terminal no petals, the parts hard to of dense, ball-like As mature, the sepals expand and become juicy and deep red, crowding feature-while fruiting leaves alternate, clusters. Flowers (mid summer to fall) tiny and unshowy together. The seeds distinguish. ripen inside of these they red, strawberry-like balls, which are the plant's most distinctive it is virtually unmistakable. The stems droop under their weight. CONFUSING PLANTS: Maple-leaved goosefoot (p. 634) lacks basal leaves. HABITAT: Forests on poor soil that have been disturbed through logging, fire, flood, windstorms, or construc- tion. Also, clearings and roadsides in such forests. Occasion- ally becomes an agricultural weed. Native. FOOD USE: From early summer through early fall the greens can be used raw or cooked. The juicy, red fruit/flower clusters are mildly sweet and make an attractive addition to salads or cooked vegetable dishes, or a fun snack. They can be eaten raw or cooked-the taste is like sweet, juicy beets. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is an iconic yet exotic wild edible of our northern forests. The red "berries" are often dismissed as "flavorless" because they don't taste like strawberries, but I think they're delicious. The seeds can remain dormant for centuries in the soil, only germinating after a fire or other catastrophe, making its abundance fleeting. This species is sometimes sold in seed catalogs. AKA strawberry blite. 350 