BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
16 Evening primrose (continued)
RELATED EDIBLES: There are many species of evening primrose in North America. All are safe to try but
are too tough or strong to be food.
HABITAT: many Sunny, well-drained, disturbed soil: farm fields, pastures, building sites, gravel pits, beaches,
roadsides, riverbanks. sloped prairies. Native.
roots from fall through spring from rosettes that lack a stem; cook make them decent before potherb. eating.
FOOD USE: Dig leaves from second-year plants in spring, just before the stem bolts, the a flowers)
are in eaten spring raw or cooked. Flowers make a pleasant nibble or cooked vegetable. The seeds dry pods
Tender, late erect shoots can be eaten after peeling and cooking. Flower buds (located above from open ripe,
can be ground and used in hot cereal or breads. Conservation 2/1/1.
COMMENTS: A common and versatile plant, sometimes subdivided into multiple species. All parts but the
flowers and seeds are slightly irritating to the mouth and throat, especially when raw.
352
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 16 Evening primrose (continued) RELATED EDIBLES: There are many species of evening primrose in North America. All are safe to try but are too tough or strong to be food. HABITAT: many Sunny, well-drained, disturbed soil: farm fields, pastures, building sites, gravel pits, beaches, roadsides, riverbanks. sloped prairies. Native. roots from fall through spring from rosettes that lack a stem; cook make them decent before potherb. eating. FOOD USE: Dig leaves from second-year plants in spring, just before the stem bolts, the a flowers) are in eaten spring raw or cooked. Flowers make a pleasant nibble or cooked vegetable. The seeds dry pods Tender, late erect shoots can be eaten after peeling and cooking. Flower buds (located above from open ripe, can be ground and used in hot cereal or breads. Conservation 2/1/1. COMMENTS: A common and versatile plant, sometimes subdivided into multiple species. All parts but the flowers and seeds are slightly irritating to the mouth and throat, especially when raw. 352 