mm
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
17 Prairie-dock
2
Silphium terebinthinaceum
Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK alternate, CHECK: Enormous basal leaves held erect on long
reduced leaves and large, yellow, composite heads patiolos ID difficulty
DESCRIPTION: crown. Basal leaves Perennial, the larger plants with multiple rosettes from 1.
curls the basal 10-22" (25-56 cm) long, elliptic to ovate, thick, tough, a multi headed
$5
secondary on lobes, bumpy, rough-hairy below, hairless above Veins raised flat except small
with broad veins numerous and prominent, 65-90° to the midvein. Margins on both sides
of blade length, nipple-tipped teeth (occasionally they are lobed or entire). Petioles hairy, usually
downward, with a small sheath at the base. Stem leaves on the lower third (often hidden shiff, hairs oriented
solid, roundish, not channeled or keeled, roughened by scattered erect, short, straight stiff. 30-350%
similarly boat-like shaped but greatly reduced, widely spaced on short petioles; above this are curled. by basal leaves) in
or leaves 1-3" (2.5-7 cm), often with maroon veins. Stems single to few, 6-9' (2-3 m) clasping, tall. sheath
(13-20 mm) thick, with scattered bumps but nearly hairless, round, rigid, solid, erect, branching only 0.5-0 in the 3"
upper half, the branches long, naked, and strongly ascending. Inflorescence consists of 5-35 widely spaced
sunflower-like heads at the ends of thin, smooth, hairless peduncles 1.5-9" (4-23 cm) long. Flower heads min
summer to early autumn) composite, to 3.5" (9 cm) wide, backed by smooth, layered bracts. Ray florets org.
narrow, notched at the tip, grooved, bright yellow. Disk florets yellow with 5 triangular lobes, but the nase it
the column is dark brown.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Elecampane Inula helenium has narrower leaves with more pointed tips, and the stem
leaves are more prominent.
HABITAT: Sunny, well-drained to moist prairies, roadsides, woodland opening :
and borders-today most commonly on rocky ridges or swamp margins Native
but often planted ornamentally.
FOOD USE: The tender young shoots of the flower stalks, appearing in rid-
summer, can be peeled and eaten raw or cooked. They are mild. tender. and
slightly sweet. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This is an absolutely striking and unforgettable plant. one of our
largest herbs. It has lost much habitat due to fire suppression and agriculture
and should be considered for native restorations and ornamental plantings.
Eating one shoot will not harm a healthy plant, but let most stalks go to bloom
Tender shoot Noth the
entire leat margins on
353
this plant.
mm 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 17 Prairie-dock 2 Silphium terebinthinaceum Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK alternate, CHECK: Enormous basal leaves held erect on long reduced leaves and large, yellow, composite heads patiolos ID difficulty DESCRIPTION: crown. Basal leaves Perennial, the larger plants with multiple rosettes from 1. curls the basal 10-22" (25-56 cm) long, elliptic to ovate, thick, tough, a multi headed $5 secondary on lobes, bumpy, rough-hairy below, hairless above Veins raised flat except small with broad veins numerous and prominent, 65-90° to the midvein. Margins on both sides of blade length, nipple-tipped teeth (occasionally they are lobed or entire). Petioles hairy, usually downward, with a small sheath at the base. Stem leaves on the lower third (often hidden shiff, hairs oriented solid, roundish, not channeled or keeled, roughened by scattered erect, short, straight stiff. 30-350% similarly boat-like shaped but greatly reduced, widely spaced on short petioles; above this are curled. by basal leaves) in or leaves 1-3" (2.5-7 cm), often with maroon veins. Stems single to few, 6-9' (2-3 m) clasping, tall. sheath (13-20 mm) thick, with scattered bumps but nearly hairless, round, rigid, solid, erect, branching only 0.5-0 in the 3" upper half, the branches long, naked, and strongly ascending. Inflorescence consists of 5-35 widely spaced sunflower-like heads at the ends of thin, smooth, hairless peduncles 1.5-9" (4-23 cm) long. Flower heads min summer to early autumn) composite, to 3.5" (9 cm) wide, backed by smooth, layered bracts. Ray florets org. narrow, notched at the tip, grooved, bright yellow. Disk florets yellow with 5 triangular lobes, but the nase it the column is dark brown. CONFUSING PLANTS: Elecampane Inula helenium has narrower leaves with more pointed tips, and the stem leaves are more prominent. HABITAT: Sunny, well-drained to moist prairies, roadsides, woodland opening : and borders-today most commonly on rocky ridges or swamp margins Native but often planted ornamentally. FOOD USE: The tender young shoots of the flower stalks, appearing in rid- summer, can be peeled and eaten raw or cooked. They are mild. tender. and slightly sweet. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This is an absolutely striking and unforgettable plant. one of our largest herbs. It has lost much habitat due to fire suppression and agriculture and should be considered for native restorations and ornamental plantings. Eating one shoot will not harm a healthy plant, but let most stalks go to bloom Tender shoot Noth the entire leat margins on 353 this plant. 