BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
18 aster
Aster Bigleaf macrophyllus 1 Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK CHECK: Large, rough, hairy, heart-shaped leaves forming a forest ground cover.
ID difficulty 2.
Perennial spreading by rhizomes, forming dense colonies with numerous aromatic
DESCRIPTION: leaves from a semi-woody, often raised base. Leaves are pleasantly and the
rosettes crushed. of 2-6 Basal leaves have an elongated heart shape, the tips sharp-pointed below,
when lobes overlapped. Blades 4-10" (10-25 cm) long with erect hairs all over-denser
and stiffer top. Tender young leaves are scrolled, glossy on top, and upright.
shorter Midvein depressed; on secondary veins slightly depressed and also offset by color and dense hair. with The unders extend
is with protruding veins. Margins serrated with large, broad, forward-pointed teeth
bristles. gray-green Petioles 80-160% of blade length, hairy all over, deeply U-channeled with sharp margins, the cha
nel narrowing toward the top so the edges nearly touch. Stems (infrequently produced) erect, zigzag, to 3
(86 cm) high and 6 mm thick, branching only in the upper part, solid, tough, gently angled, burgundy, cover
with long erect hairs. Stem leaves alternate, smaller with the broadly winged petioles becoming shorter upwa
uppermost leaves are ovate and sessile. Inflorescence a spreading panicle of 12-80 heads, the branches ve
zigzag and forked dichotomously. Flower heads (mid summer to early fall) 0.6-1.1" (15-28 mm) across, w
9-18 long-elliptic, white to pink-purple rays and yellow disk florets in the center.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Wild ginger (p. 266) has a thick sur-
face rhizome, paired leaves, and no teeth. Creeping bellflower
(p. 338) has softer hairs and milky sap.
HABITAT: Dry, sunny woods; forest borders and clearings.
Especially common under broadleaf trees that cast light
shade, such as aspen, oak, and birch. Native.
FOOD USE: The young, tender leaves, before they have
unfurled, make an aromatic nibble that can be added sparingly
to salads or cooked greens. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This species has larger basal leaves than oth-
er asters. This trait, along with its remarkable abundance in
many regions, makes
it the most practical
aster to gather. The
plants may live for
many decades with-
out flowering, and
few are seen bloom-
ing in most years-
although logging
often stimulates
mass flowering. AKA
Eurybia macrophylla.
RELATED EDIBLES:
Tender young leaves
of other asters are
safe to try, and a few
are quite good
Young leaves
for eating.
354
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 18 aster Aster Bigleaf macrophyllus 1 Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK CHECK: Large, rough, hairy, heart-shaped leaves forming a forest ground cover. ID difficulty 2. Perennial spreading by rhizomes, forming dense colonies with numerous aromatic DESCRIPTION: leaves from a semi-woody, often raised base. Leaves are pleasantly and the rosettes crushed. of 2-6 Basal leaves have an elongated heart shape, the tips sharp-pointed below, when lobes overlapped. Blades 4-10" (10-25 cm) long with erect hairs all over-denser and stiffer top. Tender young leaves are scrolled, glossy on top, and upright. shorter Midvein depressed; on secondary veins slightly depressed and also offset by color and dense hair. with The unders extend is with protruding veins. Margins serrated with large, broad, forward-pointed teeth bristles. gray-green Petioles 80-160% of blade length, hairy all over, deeply U-channeled with sharp margins, the cha nel narrowing toward the top so the edges nearly touch. Stems (infrequently produced) erect, zigzag, to 3 (86 cm) high and 6 mm thick, branching only in the upper part, solid, tough, gently angled, burgundy, cover with long erect hairs. Stem leaves alternate, smaller with the broadly winged petioles becoming shorter upwa uppermost leaves are ovate and sessile. Inflorescence a spreading panicle of 12-80 heads, the branches ve zigzag and forked dichotomously. Flower heads (mid summer to early fall) 0.6-1.1" (15-28 mm) across, w 9-18 long-elliptic, white to pink-purple rays and yellow disk florets in the center. CONFUSING PLANTS: Wild ginger (p. 266) has a thick sur- face rhizome, paired leaves, and no teeth. Creeping bellflower (p. 338) has softer hairs and milky sap. HABITAT: Dry, sunny woods; forest borders and clearings. Especially common under broadleaf trees that cast light shade, such as aspen, oak, and birch. Native. FOOD USE: The young, tender leaves, before they have unfurled, make an aromatic nibble that can be added sparingly to salads or cooked greens. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This species has larger basal leaves than oth- er asters. This trait, along with its remarkable abundance in many regions, makes it the most practical aster to gather. The plants may live for many decades with- out flowering, and few are seen bloom- ing in most years- although logging often stimulates mass flowering. AKA Eurybia macrophylla. RELATED EDIBLES: Tender young leaves of other asters are safe to try, and a few are quite good Young leaves for eating. 354 