mm
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
9 Canada violet
3
ELi
IWE-375
Viola canadensis
family
Violaceae
QUICK CHECK: Short herb with broad, toothed leaves on long patioles with stimules
each 5-petaled irregular flower at the end of a nodding stam. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Short perennial herb from a thin, semi-woody rhizome. Hairiness
vegetative parts is highly variable-some populations are almost completely hairless. of the
while others are densely hairy. Basal leaves light green, 3-6" (8-15 cm) long, heart-shaped,
the tips blunt to acuminate. Veins semi-palmate, with 2 or 4 major veins from the base.
then another nearby pair arching toward the tip. Veins and veinlets are depressed above and protrude below
Margins have widely spaced, white-
tipped teeth, shaped like a wave cresting
toward the leaf tip. Petioles thin. chan
neled, green, 1-4 times the blade length
Stem to 13" (33 cm) tall and , 1mm
thick, zigzag, light green, round smooth.
solid, the internodes long. Stem leaves
alternate, smaller and narrower with
shorter petioles and long-acuminare
tips. Stipules narrow, entire, 5-2 5
(13-15 mm) long. Flowers single on long
erect, hooked pedicels from upper leaf
axils. Pedicels have an offset pair of tiny
bracts, and each flower has a calyx
of 5 separate, pointed, linear sepais
shorter than the petais. Corolla 5 bet-
als of unequal size, the largest (head)
pointing down and spurred at the base.
one pair (arms) spreading, and another
pair (legs) pointing back toward the
stem. Petals white with a yellow base,
the lower 3 with darkened purple veins.
the "arm" petals with "hairy armpits."
Petal backs are light violet Hidden,
self-fertile flowers are occasionally pro-
duced in the axils of upper leaves after
the showy flowers are done. Pod round
to elliptic, 5-¹² mm long.
HABITAT: Rich-soiled but usually
rocky deciduous forests. especially
on slopes. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender young leaves in
spring, raw or cooked. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This is my favorite vio-
let to eat. The leaves are tender. large,
and mild-tasting with an exotic hint et
wintergreen. Occurrence of this spe- IS
Lies can be hard to predict out it
locally abundant. Because of its divided great
regional variation it has been
into a number of forms or subspecies are
true violets (in the genus viola)
All There are many stemmed species
sale. with a variety of leaf shapes (Stemless
violets are in group 19
355
mm 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 9 Canada violet 3 ELi IWE-375 Viola canadensis family Violaceae QUICK CHECK: Short herb with broad, toothed leaves on long patioles with stimules each 5-petaled irregular flower at the end of a nodding stam. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Short perennial herb from a thin, semi-woody rhizome. Hairiness vegetative parts is highly variable-some populations are almost completely hairless. of the while others are densely hairy. Basal leaves light green, 3-6" (8-15 cm) long, heart-shaped, the tips blunt to acuminate. Veins semi-palmate, with 2 or 4 major veins from the base. then another nearby pair arching toward the tip. Veins and veinlets are depressed above and protrude below Margins have widely spaced, white- tipped teeth, shaped like a wave cresting toward the leaf tip. Petioles thin. chan neled, green, 1-4 times the blade length Stem to 13" (33 cm) tall and , 1mm thick, zigzag, light green, round smooth. solid, the internodes long. Stem leaves alternate, smaller and narrower with shorter petioles and long-acuminare tips. Stipules narrow, entire, 5-2 5 (13-15 mm) long. Flowers single on long erect, hooked pedicels from upper leaf axils. Pedicels have an offset pair of tiny bracts, and each flower has a calyx of 5 separate, pointed, linear sepais shorter than the petais. Corolla 5 bet- als of unequal size, the largest (head) pointing down and spurred at the base. one pair (arms) spreading, and another pair (legs) pointing back toward the stem. Petals white with a yellow base, the lower 3 with darkened purple veins. the "arm" petals with "hairy armpits." Petal backs are light violet Hidden, self-fertile flowers are occasionally pro- duced in the axils of upper leaves after the showy flowers are done. Pod round to elliptic, 5-¹² mm long. HABITAT: Rich-soiled but usually rocky deciduous forests. especially on slopes. Native. FOOD USE: Tender young leaves in spring, raw or cooked. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This is my favorite vio- let to eat. The leaves are tender. large, and mild-tasting with an exotic hint et wintergreen. Occurrence of this spe- IS Lies can be hard to predict out it locally abundant. Because of its divided great regional variation it has been into a number of forms or subspecies are true violets (in the genus viola) All There are many stemmed species sale. with a variety of leaf shapes (Stemless violets are in group 19 355 