BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
Related edible
20 Common yellow violet Viola pubescens
1
This is a common, widespread, stemmed violet with large leaves that grows in forests.
but it is more characteristic of sandy or loamy, less rocky soils than Canada violet. It
may have from one to a few basal leaves, although occasionally basal leaves are absent.
Leaves 1-3.2" (2.5-8 cm) long, broadly triangular to heart-shaped; the tips may be abruptly
pointed or blunt. Margins have widely spaced, blunt teeth, and usually a fringe of hairs.
Surfaces range from densely soft-hairy (especially below) to nearly hairless. Stipules ovate
and sometimes notched. Flowers 0.5-0.7" (13-18 mm)
across with yellow petals, the lower one (sometimes 3)
with dark purple-brown veins. The side petals have a
yellow "beard" at the base.
COMMENTS: This species is not as good-tasting
as Canada violet, and it lacks the wintergreen fla-
vor, but it is easy to collect. Some sources claim that
yellow-flowered violets are not edible, but I have been
unable to find any basis for this claim. I have eaten
this particular species hundreds of times, both raw
and cooked, although never more than a handful or
two, because it's rather low on my preference list.
It may actually be two species: Some taxonomists
recognize V. pubescens as a species with fewer basal
leaves and stems and blades that are always densely
hairy (downy yeilow violet). Plants that have more
numerous basal leaves that are nearly hairless, and
in stems that are hairless or have the hair concentrated
If a few narrow lines, are separated as V eriocarpa.
differences, but you can eat either form.
you pay attention you may eventually notice these
854
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED Related edible 20 Common yellow violet Viola pubescens 1 This is a common, widespread, stemmed violet with large leaves that grows in forests. but it is more characteristic of sandy or loamy, less rocky soils than Canada violet. It may have from one to a few basal leaves, although occasionally basal leaves are absent. Leaves 1-3.2" (2.5-8 cm) long, broadly triangular to heart-shaped; the tips may be abruptly pointed or blunt. Margins have widely spaced, blunt teeth, and usually a fringe of hairs. Surfaces range from densely soft-hairy (especially below) to nearly hairless. Stipules ovate and sometimes notched. Flowers 0.5-0.7" (13-18 mm) across with yellow petals, the lower one (sometimes 3) with dark purple-brown veins. The side petals have a yellow "beard" at the base. COMMENTS: This species is not as good-tasting as Canada violet, and it lacks the wintergreen fla- vor, but it is easy to collect. Some sources claim that yellow-flowered violets are not edible, but I have been unable to find any basis for this claim. I have eaten this particular species hundreds of times, both raw and cooked, although never more than a handful or two, because it's rather low on my preference list. It may actually be two species: Some taxonomists recognize V. pubescens as a species with fewer basal leaves and stems and blades that are always densely hairy (downy yeilow violet). Plants that have more numerous basal leaves that are nearly hairless, and in stems that are hairless or have the hair concentrated If a few narrow lines, are separated as V eriocarpa. differences, but you can eat either form. you pay attention you may eventually notice these 854 