BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
2 Texas skeletonplant
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY
3
Lygodesmia texana Asteraceae 3 (Composite family)
reads purple florets. ID difficulty 1.
ICK of CHECK: light Thin, lanky, lax stems with a few linear leaves and midely
DESCRIPTION: Basal leaves 4-8" Perennial from a tough taproot, also spreading by
very narrow, short, (10-20 long, very narrow (less than cm), linear, rhizome. with Latex white
above and faintly linear lobes. Blades are hairless, the major veins widely spaced,
and weakly erect to visible below. Rosette eventually disappears during parallel but obscure
thick, single leaning or lax, often supported by surrounding flowering. Stems lanky
widely spreading. or few, Stem roundish, leaves smooth to minutely roughened, hairless, vegetation, faintly to angled. 28" (70 Branches cm) tall and sparse mr
occasionally with a short, alternate, widely spaced, sessile, to 6" (15 cm) long and 5 rnm Mide and
broadly V-channeled. outward-pointing tooth or lobe), long-tapered to the base linear (only
5-7 wide, Flower heads (May-Sept.) few and widely spaced, the involucres and the sharp ho. the blade
tips. mm Florets 8-12 cylindrical, with long, ridged, hairless bracts, appearing conjoined; free only near 0.8" the 12 cm; long and
per head, rays only, the open head spreading 1.1-1.5" (28-38 mm) across. Sexual sharp columns recurved
in the center are long. purple.
and curvy. The seed is small
with attached bristles but.no
parachute.
HABITAT: Dry, sunny loca-
tions: Open forests and
savannahs, roadsides, prai
ries, fields. Native. A
FOOD USE: Every tender
part above ground is edible
and excellent: leaves, stems
peduncles, and flower buds.
These are most abundant in
early summer but new ten-
der growth appears in small
amounts any time the plants
are flowering. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: Because of the
small volume embodied in this
plant it is probably easier to
overharvest than most mem-
bers of this group especially
when harvesting shoots It
you eat it, curate it; plant ripe
seeds in small disturbances to
help propagation
RELATED EDIBLES: L. jun-
ced IS much more widespread
but also much smaller: it has
no basal leaves. Rose-rush
L aphylla is round in sandy
pine woodlands and savan-
nahs mostly (1) Florida; it is
almost identical to Texas
skeletonplant but the
steins are leatless 11 has
declined greatly due to me
No lobes are visible here because they are mostly
suppression.
Flower bud and
tender stem.
confined to basal leaves.
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, 2 Texas skeletonplant LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY 3 Lygodesmia texana Asteraceae 3 (Composite family) reads purple florets. ID difficulty 1. ICK of CHECK: light Thin, lanky, lax stems with a few linear leaves and midely DESCRIPTION: Basal leaves 4-8" Perennial from a tough taproot, also spreading by very narrow, short, (10-20 long, very narrow (less than cm), linear, rhizome. with Latex white above and faintly linear lobes. Blades are hairless, the major veins widely spaced, and weakly erect to visible below. Rosette eventually disappears during parallel but obscure thick, single leaning or lax, often supported by surrounding flowering. Stems lanky widely spreading. or few, Stem roundish, leaves smooth to minutely roughened, hairless, vegetation, faintly to angled. 28" (70 Branches cm) tall and sparse mr occasionally with a short, alternate, widely spaced, sessile, to 6" (15 cm) long and 5 rnm Mide and broadly V-channeled. outward-pointing tooth or lobe), long-tapered to the base linear (only 5-7 wide, Flower heads (May-Sept.) few and widely spaced, the involucres and the sharp ho. the blade tips. mm Florets 8-12 cylindrical, with long, ridged, hairless bracts, appearing conjoined; free only near 0.8" the 12 cm; long and per head, rays only, the open head spreading 1.1-1.5" (28-38 mm) across. Sexual sharp columns recurved in the center are long. purple. and curvy. The seed is small with attached bristles but.no parachute. HABITAT: Dry, sunny loca- tions: Open forests and savannahs, roadsides, prai ries, fields. Native. A FOOD USE: Every tender part above ground is edible and excellent: leaves, stems peduncles, and flower buds. These are most abundant in early summer but new ten- der growth appears in small amounts any time the plants are flowering. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: Because of the small volume embodied in this plant it is probably easier to overharvest than most mem- bers of this group especially when harvesting shoots It you eat it, curate it; plant ripe seeds in small disturbances to help propagation RELATED EDIBLES: L. jun- ced IS much more widespread but also much smaller: it has no basal leaves. Rose-rush L aphylla is round in sandy pine woodlands and savan- nahs mostly (1) Florida; it is almost identical to Texas skeletonplant but the steins are leatless 11 has declined greatly due to me No lobes are visible here because they are mostly suppression. Flower bud and tender stem. confined to basal leaves. 