BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY
(Continued from previous page.)
Keel with or
Stem leaves prickles clasping spines. with 2 small, pointed lobes at the base, tapered to a point,
25. Willow-leaf lettuce
nearly entire.
Stem leaves toothed. often lobed. but lacking pointed basal lobes.
26. Prickly lettuce
Prickles long, dense; stem prickly and latex white.
27. Prairie lettuce
Prickles short, sparse; stem not prickly: latex turns brown.
Prenanthes
2
1
NG-447
1
Prenanthes alba
Asteraceae
(Composite
family)
QUICK CHECK: Broad, arrowhead-shaped basal leaves on long petioles; tall stalk with
drooping flower heads. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Monocarpic perennial with latex turning brown. For most of its life first it
has 1-3 basal leaves 1-10" (2.5-25 cm) long, almost unbelievably variable in shape: at
arrowhead-shaped with smooth edges, becoming more prominently toothed as they get
larger, eventually developing multiple lobes, sometimes deep and complex. Surfaces hair-
less above, hairy below (especially on main veins). Midvein nearly flat above, often reddish;
Composite
veinlets are slightly depressed above and protruding below. Margins have scattered, large,
range of eastern
mucronate teeth. Petioles rounded with a small channel, hollow, about 120% of blade
Prenanthes.
length, generally hairless, with a double-wing ridge on top that starts at the blade and
tapers toward the base. Stalks single, 2-7' (0.6-2.1 m) tall and 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm) thick, straight, unbranched,
rounded, hollow, the surface smooth except for scattered dark, raised bumps. Stem leaves alternate, deeply
3-lobed or pinnately lobed, on broad-based, winged petioles that become shorter going up the stalk. Inflores-
cence crowded panicles of drooping heads at the tips of ascending branches. Heads cylindrical, not bulged at
the base, 0.4-0.6" (10-15 mm) long, the bracts purplish with lighter margins, opening bell-like but not broadly.
Florets whitish, truncated with 5-lobed tips, the seeds 5-6 mm long with a reddish-brown parachute.
HABITAT: Hardwood or mixed hardwood-conifer forests in almost all soil types. Rarely abundant but found
in almost every woodlot or forest within its range. Most common under a light canopy (such as oak, aspen,
and pine) on hillsides; often proliferates after logging or windstorms. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender leaves in spring or early summer can be eaten raw or cooked. Just prior to bolting, the
leaves (even meristematic ones) usually become more bitter. The shoot is bitter but can be eaten steamed
or boiled, and is very tender when young. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: Prenanthes is not particularly well known as an edible green but is abundant, widespread, and
pretty good. AKA Nabalus albus, white lettuce, rattlesnake root, lion's foot.
RELATED EDIBLES:
There are several species
of Prenanthes, all of which
are edible and can be used
similarly, although some
of them are quite bitter. P.
altissima is large and lush
and equally good P. trifo-
liata has lower leaves that
are often divided into 3
fully separate sections
Variable shape of basal leaves.
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY (Continued from previous page.) Keel with or Stem leaves prickles clasping spines. with 2 small, pointed lobes at the base, tapered to a point, 25. Willow-leaf lettuce nearly entire. Stem leaves toothed. often lobed. but lacking pointed basal lobes. 26. Prickly lettuce Prickles long, dense; stem prickly and latex white. 27. Prairie lettuce Prickles short, sparse; stem not prickly: latex turns brown. Prenanthes 2 1 NG-447 1 Prenanthes alba Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK CHECK: Broad, arrowhead-shaped basal leaves on long petioles; tall stalk with drooping flower heads. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Monocarpic perennial with latex turning brown. For most of its life first it has 1-3 basal leaves 1-10" (2.5-25 cm) long, almost unbelievably variable in shape: at arrowhead-shaped with smooth edges, becoming more prominently toothed as they get larger, eventually developing multiple lobes, sometimes deep and complex. Surfaces hair- less above, hairy below (especially on main veins). Midvein nearly flat above, often reddish; Composite veinlets are slightly depressed above and protruding below. Margins have scattered, large, range of eastern mucronate teeth. Petioles rounded with a small channel, hollow, about 120% of blade Prenanthes. length, generally hairless, with a double-wing ridge on top that starts at the blade and tapers toward the base. Stalks single, 2-7' (0.6-2.1 m) tall and 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm) thick, straight, unbranched, rounded, hollow, the surface smooth except for scattered dark, raised bumps. Stem leaves alternate, deeply 3-lobed or pinnately lobed, on broad-based, winged petioles that become shorter going up the stalk. Inflores- cence crowded panicles of drooping heads at the tips of ascending branches. Heads cylindrical, not bulged at the base, 0.4-0.6" (10-15 mm) long, the bracts purplish with lighter margins, opening bell-like but not broadly. Florets whitish, truncated with 5-lobed tips, the seeds 5-6 mm long with a reddish-brown parachute. HABITAT: Hardwood or mixed hardwood-conifer forests in almost all soil types. Rarely abundant but found in almost every woodlot or forest within its range. Most common under a light canopy (such as oak, aspen, and pine) on hillsides; often proliferates after logging or windstorms. Native. FOOD USE: Tender leaves in spring or early summer can be eaten raw or cooked. Just prior to bolting, the leaves (even meristematic ones) usually become more bitter. The shoot is bitter but can be eaten steamed or boiled, and is very tender when young. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: Prenanthes is not particularly well known as an edible green but is abundant, widespread, and pretty good. AKA Nabalus albus, white lettuce, rattlesnake root, lion's foot. RELATED EDIBLES: There are several species of Prenanthes, all of which are edible and can be used similarly, although some of them are quite bitter. P. altissima is large and lush and equally good P. trifo- liata has lower leaves that are often divided into 3 fully separate sections Variable shape of basal leaves. 