BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY
Scorzonera Scorzonera laciniata 2 Asteraceae 3 &2 (Composite family)
3
3
CHECK Basal leaves with long, narrow lobes but no teeth; shin-high, branching
QUICK stalks with dandelion-like yellow flowerheads. ID difficulty 2.
annual or biennial with white latex. Taproots fleshy with but milky not
DESCRIPTION: the leafy Winter crown, long, tapering, not much branched, dark-skinned, but erect where
thicker than leaves numerous, hugging the ground without competition cm) long, the
Rapidly
sap. Rosette is dense, sometimes growing thick like lawn grass, to 16" (40 are often
expanding.
vegetation entire but usually with long, narrow lobes. The leaf tips
blades folded. occasionally The blade is finely scurfy, especially on the margin. Lobes or segments are the usually tip thin few, and long the
deeply widely separated and out of plane with the rachis, long-lanceolate to linear, between the lobes.
base and projecting, often slightly narrowed. Margins not toothed. The rachis has upturned wings/blade of blade
On low-competition rosettes the terminal lobe often widens toward the blunt tip. Petioles 40-70%
length, narrow, deeper than wide, hollow, densely to sparsely hairy and wing-channeled, the channel silvery.
Stem leaves alternate, smaller, and usually entire. Stems single or multiple, prostrate (without competition)
to erect, up to 16" (40 cm) tall, and 8 mm thick, rounded, solid at first becoming hollow with age, often purple
near the base, the surface with fine ridges that are more pronounced toward the top. Branches are few. Leaves
and stems may have scattered clumps of woolly hair when young but are hairless with age. Inflorescence
(spring) a few apical flowerheads on peduncles to 8" (20 cm) long, single or in small clusters. Buds have lay-
ered, triangular bracts that are strongly keeled along the central vein, the tip margins purple-brown. Heads
1-2.5 cm (0.4-1") across with yellow rays, opening in the morning and soon closing, tapered to a point when
closed. Seeds parachuted, elongated, borne in small dandelion-like heads.
HABITAT: Well-drained, sunny, disturbed soil of the higher and drier parts of the Great Plains. Adapted to
salty conditions and thus thriving and spreading on the sides of major highways. Introduced.
FOOD USE: The roots can be dug in fall, winter, or spring from plants that have not yet produced a stalk, and
can be eaten cooked. The flavor is rich and hearty like salsify, but the root is small and has a tough core. The
young, tender leaves, shoots, and flower buds can be collected in spring or early summer and eaten raw or
cooked. Their flavor is mild and excellent.
COMMENTS: This is a close relative of the cultivated scorzonera S. hispanica. It was first discovered as a
weed in the US near Boulder, Colorado in the 1950s and has spread through much of the western Great Plains.
Distribution is erratic, but the plant is locally abundant, and is expanding its range. AKA false salsify, viper root.
360
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY Scorzonera Scorzonera laciniata 2 Asteraceae 3 &2 (Composite family) 3 3 CHECK Basal leaves with long, narrow lobes but no teeth; shin-high, branching QUICK stalks with dandelion-like yellow flowerheads. ID difficulty 2. annual or biennial with white latex. Taproots fleshy with but milky not DESCRIPTION: the leafy Winter crown, long, tapering, not much branched, dark-skinned, but erect where thicker than leaves numerous, hugging the ground without competition cm) long, the Rapidly sap. Rosette is dense, sometimes growing thick like lawn grass, to 16" (40 are often expanding. vegetation entire but usually with long, narrow lobes. The leaf tips blades folded. occasionally The blade is finely scurfy, especially on the margin. Lobes or segments are the usually tip thin few, and long the deeply widely separated and out of plane with the rachis, long-lanceolate to linear, between the lobes. base and projecting, often slightly narrowed. Margins not toothed. The rachis has upturned wings/blade of blade On low-competition rosettes the terminal lobe often widens toward the blunt tip. Petioles 40-70% length, narrow, deeper than wide, hollow, densely to sparsely hairy and wing-channeled, the channel silvery. Stem leaves alternate, smaller, and usually entire. Stems single or multiple, prostrate (without competition) to erect, up to 16" (40 cm) tall, and 8 mm thick, rounded, solid at first becoming hollow with age, often purple near the base, the surface with fine ridges that are more pronounced toward the top. Branches are few. Leaves and stems may have scattered clumps of woolly hair when young but are hairless with age. Inflorescence (spring) a few apical flowerheads on peduncles to 8" (20 cm) long, single or in small clusters. Buds have lay- ered, triangular bracts that are strongly keeled along the central vein, the tip margins purple-brown. Heads 1-2.5 cm (0.4-1") across with yellow rays, opening in the morning and soon closing, tapered to a point when closed. Seeds parachuted, elongated, borne in small dandelion-like heads. HABITAT: Well-drained, sunny, disturbed soil of the higher and drier parts of the Great Plains. Adapted to salty conditions and thus thriving and spreading on the sides of major highways. Introduced. FOOD USE: The roots can be dug in fall, winter, or spring from plants that have not yet produced a stalk, and can be eaten cooked. The flavor is rich and hearty like salsify, but the root is small and has a tough core. The young, tender leaves, shoots, and flower buds can be collected in spring or early summer and eaten raw or cooked. Their flavor is mild and excellent. COMMENTS: This is a close relative of the cultivated scorzonera S. hispanica. It was first discovered as a weed in the US near Boulder, Colorado in the 1950s and has spread through much of the western Great Plains. Distribution is erratic, but the plant is locally abundant, and is expanding its range. AKA false salsify, viper root. 360 