0
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
THISTLE
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY
[]
FH-333
Asteraceae (Composite family)
genera Cirsium, Carduus, Onopordum, Silybum
brush-like QUICK CHECK: heads Erect of numerous herbs, leaves thin, radiating woolly below florets. and ID toothed difficulty or lobed, 1. with sharp
COLLECTIVE have fibrous DESCRIPTION: Biennials or perennials, most species with
pinnately lobed or spreading roots). Sap is faintly milky. Basal leaves numerous, large taproots (although a few
the underside. Midribs and ruffled or wavy, several times longer than wide. Surfaces 8-22" hairy (20 cm) long, mostly
sharp spines, broadly on triangular, flat above and keeled below. Margins toothed or tomentose and armed at least on
erect, especially the lobe tips. Stems 2-7' (60-210 cm) tall and 0.7-1.5" (18-38 with long,
angled, usually unbranched below the middle, hairy, often spiny and winged below the nodes, mm) thick, straight,
thick-walled but hollow. Stem leaves alternate, sessile, similar to the basal but becoming roundish but
sively smaller. Flower heads 1-2" (2.5-5 wide, the involucre roundish to elongated, covered by progres-
spine-tipped bracts with a thickened midvein, constricted at the tip. Florets spread moderately like the numerous bristles
of a shaving brush, light purple or pink in most species, occasionally yellow or white, appearing thread- ike,
consisting of a long, thin tube divided into 5 long, slender lobes. Seeds (achenes) flattened, with parachutes.
FOOD USE: (This is a generalized account; some uses are not applicable to certain species.) Taproots (fall
through spring) of most species can be eaten raw or cooked. Shoots (late spring to early summer) can be
eaten raw or cooked after they have been carefully peeled. I start by removing the leaves and spines in the
field with a knife, then peeling the thick skin. Midribs (spring through fall) of the leaves can be eaten raw or
cooked after removing the leafy sides and accompanying spines; they are crisp, juicy, and a bit stringy, like
celery. Flower buds (early to mid summer) can be peeled, and the tender centers eaten like artichoke hearts,
but on most species they are too small and difficult to bother.
COMMENTS: Thistles are one of the best and easiest groups of edible plants for a forager to learn. They are
abundant throughout our region, especially in human-disturbed landscapes. They are great for converting
wild food skeptics-if you learn the nuances of selecting them at the right time. The peeled stalks are usually
the best produce from a thistle, but the taproots of some species are also superb.
SPECIES: I am lumping four closely related genera together here, since their food uses are similar. All species
are edible, but the quality varies. There are many Cirsium thistles not listed, including some excellent ones.
Bull thistle shoots, before and after peeling.
Cirsium discolor
2
2
3
4 Pasture thistle
Common in meadows and fields, this native thistle grows
4-6' (1.2-1.8 m) tall. The leaves have narrow lobes and
are silvery-white on the underside. The florets are pale
purple. Full-grown pasture thistle has large, tender, sweet
roots. The stalks and midribs are also good, especially
as cooked vegetables. Conservation 3/2. A (Continued
on the next page.)
0 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, THISTLE LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY [] FH-333 Asteraceae (Composite family) genera Cirsium, Carduus, Onopordum, Silybum brush-like QUICK CHECK: heads Erect of numerous herbs, leaves thin, radiating woolly below florets. and ID toothed difficulty or lobed, 1. with sharp COLLECTIVE have fibrous DESCRIPTION: Biennials or perennials, most species with pinnately lobed or spreading roots). Sap is faintly milky. Basal leaves numerous, large taproots (although a few the underside. Midribs and ruffled or wavy, several times longer than wide. Surfaces 8-22" hairy (20 cm) long, mostly sharp spines, broadly on triangular, flat above and keeled below. Margins toothed or tomentose and armed at least on erect, especially the lobe tips. Stems 2-7' (60-210 cm) tall and 0.7-1.5" (18-38 with long, angled, usually unbranched below the middle, hairy, often spiny and winged below the nodes, mm) thick, straight, thick-walled but hollow. Stem leaves alternate, sessile, similar to the basal but becoming roundish but sively smaller. Flower heads 1-2" (2.5-5 wide, the involucre roundish to elongated, covered by progres- spine-tipped bracts with a thickened midvein, constricted at the tip. Florets spread moderately like the numerous bristles of a shaving brush, light purple or pink in most species, occasionally yellow or white, appearing thread- ike, consisting of a long, thin tube divided into 5 long, slender lobes. Seeds (achenes) flattened, with parachutes. FOOD USE: (This is a generalized account; some uses are not applicable to certain species.) Taproots (fall through spring) of most species can be eaten raw or cooked. Shoots (late spring to early summer) can be eaten raw or cooked after they have been carefully peeled. I start by removing the leaves and spines in the field with a knife, then peeling the thick skin. Midribs (spring through fall) of the leaves can be eaten raw or cooked after removing the leafy sides and accompanying spines; they are crisp, juicy, and a bit stringy, like celery. Flower buds (early to mid summer) can be peeled, and the tender centers eaten like artichoke hearts, but on most species they are too small and difficult to bother. COMMENTS: Thistles are one of the best and easiest groups of edible plants for a forager to learn. They are abundant throughout our region, especially in human-disturbed landscapes. They are great for converting wild food skeptics-if you learn the nuances of selecting them at the right time. The peeled stalks are usually the best produce from a thistle, but the taproots of some species are also superb. SPECIES: I am lumping four closely related genera together here, since their food uses are similar. All species are edible, but the quality varies. There are many Cirsium thistles not listed, including some excellent ones. Bull thistle shoots, before and after peeling. Cirsium discolor 2 2 3 4 Pasture thistle Common in meadows and fields, this native thistle grows 4-6' (1.2-1.8 m) tall. The leaves have narrow lobes and are silvery-white on the underside. The florets are pale purple. Full-grown pasture thistle has large, tender, sweet roots. The stalks and midribs are also good, especially as cooked vegetables. Conservation 3/2. A (Continued on the next page.) 