0
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LOBED STEM LEAVES
7
Bull thistle
OR DIVIDED, ALTERNATE, SAP MILKY
Cirsium
vulgare
1
2
Abundant, 2.1 m) in non-native. weedy species
widely in height full The stem is hairy and rear robust, hing
not silvery sun, with purple flowerheads. The branching
that runs on the underside, and they have a leaves are
most down onto the stem below. This IS thorny wing
our heavily-armed thistles, and it is the only one of our
Shoots area with spines lying flat on the upper leaf species in
to be worth make a good cooked vegetable, and the leaf surface. midribs are large enough
peeling. The roots are tough and less preferable.
Bull thistle shoot at the stage for peeling and eating.
8
Swamp thistle
Cirsium
muticum
2
3
than This native thistle reaches 6-9' (1.8-2.7 m) tall, the stalks ridged and proportionately
our other species. The leaves are long, with long, narrow lobes cut close to the midvein, thinner
and many of the larger lobes are compound.
The roots are tough and divide into many small
fibrous branches, making them useless for eat-
ing. However, the shoots and petioles are good.
Rare in the southern third of range.
Scotch thistle
Onopordum acanthium
2
Biennial 4-9' (1.2-2.7 m) tall. All parts
are covered with wool in varying den-
sity-at the extreme it gives the plant
a ghostly whitish-gray appearance. The
basal leaves are large and deeply ruffled
but shallowly lobed; stem leaves are
less ruffled. Broad, spiny, leafy wings run
down the stem from each node, often obscuring it. Flower
heads are usually in small clusters, held upright. with purple
florets. Once you get past the spiny wings, this species has
respectable flavor, but I've only eaten the stems.
363
0 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LOBED STEM LEAVES 7 Bull thistle OR DIVIDED, ALTERNATE, SAP MILKY Cirsium vulgare 1 2 Abundant, 2.1 m) in non-native. weedy species widely in height full The stem is hairy and rear robust, hing not silvery sun, with purple flowerheads. The branching that runs on the underside, and they have a leaves are most down onto the stem below. This IS thorny wing our heavily-armed thistles, and it is the only one of our Shoots area with spines lying flat on the upper leaf species in to be worth make a good cooked vegetable, and the leaf surface. midribs are large enough peeling. The roots are tough and less preferable. Bull thistle shoot at the stage for peeling and eating. 8 Swamp thistle Cirsium muticum 2 3 than This native thistle reaches 6-9' (1.8-2.7 m) tall, the stalks ridged and proportionately our other species. The leaves are long, with long, narrow lobes cut close to the midvein, thinner and many of the larger lobes are compound. The roots are tough and divide into many small fibrous branches, making them useless for eat- ing. However, the shoots and petioles are good. Rare in the southern third of range. Scotch thistle Onopordum acanthium 2 Biennial 4-9' (1.2-2.7 m) tall. All parts are covered with wool in varying den- sity-at the extreme it gives the plant a ghostly whitish-gray appearance. The basal leaves are large and deeply ruffled but shallowly lobed; stem leaves are less ruffled. Broad, spiny, leafy wings run down the stem from each node, often obscuring it. Flower heads are usually in small clusters, held upright. with purple florets. Once you get past the spiny wings, this species has respectable flavor, but I've only eaten the stems. 363 