BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY
4
Pasture thistle (continued)
5 Tall thistle
Cirsium altissimum
3
2
3
An elegant native thistle typically 6-10' (2-3 m) tall, inhabiting
open woodlands and forest margins on rich soil. The basal leaves
are lightly armed, scarcely lobed or unlobed, and silvery-white
beneath. Stem leaves may be lobed or entire. Florets are light
purple. The roots
are large, tender,
and sweet-good
even raw. The
stalks and midribs
are also larger and
more tender than
most species, and
are less thorny to
handle. AKA wood-
land thistle. Con-
servation 3/2.
6 Spring thistle
Cirsium horridulum
3
3
3
that A native blooms species in spring, with yellow to purple flowers
flower lioneydew thick is thistles (60-150 root. and a dense the It The heads. might in peeled cm) leaves the whorl melon. tall be The same shoot are of and petioles Don't exceptionally leaves area, are is much delicious believe The proportionately are directly earlier the stems me? spiny tenderest raw, beneath than reach Go and with try other there very 2-5' the a it. of flavor any 1 thistle reminiscent I've tried, of
really
good.
have
not
eaten
the
Spring thistle, beginning to bloom but the stem is still tender.
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY 4 Pasture thistle (continued) 5 Tall thistle Cirsium altissimum 3 2 3 An elegant native thistle typically 6-10' (2-3 m) tall, inhabiting open woodlands and forest margins on rich soil. The basal leaves are lightly armed, scarcely lobed or unlobed, and silvery-white beneath. Stem leaves may be lobed or entire. Florets are light purple. The roots are large, tender, and sweet-good even raw. The stalks and midribs are also larger and more tender than most species, and are less thorny to handle. AKA wood- land thistle. Con- servation 3/2. 6 Spring thistle Cirsium horridulum 3 3 3 that A native blooms species in spring, with yellow to purple flowers flower lioneydew thick is thistles (60-150 root. and a dense the It The heads. might in peeled cm) leaves the whorl melon. tall be The same shoot are of and petioles Don't exceptionally leaves area, are is much delicious believe The proportionately are directly earlier the stems me? spiny tenderest raw, beneath than reach Go and with try other there very 2-5' the a it. of flavor any 1 thistle reminiscent I've tried, of really good. have not eaten the Spring thistle, beginning to bloom but the stem is still tender. 