BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY
3
2
3
10 8-12" (20-30 cm) long and almost hairless, covered the
Nodding thistle + Carduus nutans
Biennial 8 (1.5:2.4 m) tall. Basal the leaves midribs are light and hairless above. Stems peduncle are is long,
edges strongly ruffled and silvery, that extend down from the leaf axils. The single large,
with leafv, spiny, ruffled naked, wings without leafy wings, not spiny, slightly hairy, The with a bracts of the
nodding, purple mm wide (very wide compared to other thistles) and is introduced
ascending, almost flowerhead 1.3-2.5" (33-65 mm) across at the end. spiny the outer ones are
reflexed. The well-drained, sunny areas with disturbed soil. The roots buds, as with fibrous. artichoke The midribs hearts,
involucre are seeds 4-10 (achenes) have no parachute at the end. This species are tough and
and inhabits dry, thistles. If you are going to peel thistle flower and pleasant to eat
are of middling has quality the largest among in our region. The shoots are among our best and are sweet its are hardly worth
even this species raw. The closely related Carduus acanthoides is much smaller. While edible, parts
peeling. Both Carduus species are invasive. I
Corduus acanthoides rosette.
77 Milk thistle Silybum marianum
2
cultivation This biennial for species is sparsely distributed in our area, where it occasionally
stiff, spine-upped, are purple, and beneath the head there shiny green leaves
with bright white medicinal veins. The uses. florets It is readily recognized by its variegated, escapes from
-channeled bracts. The stems are grooved and usually is a whorl have sparse, of long,
fine wool on the
surface. The leaf
blades/petioles/
midribs, young
stalks, and roots
are all edible-al-
164
though 1 have only
eaten the leaves.
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY 3 2 3 10 8-12" (20-30 cm) long and almost hairless, covered the Nodding thistle + Carduus nutans Biennial 8 (1.5:2.4 m) tall. Basal the leaves midribs are light and hairless above. Stems peduncle are is long, edges strongly ruffled and silvery, that extend down from the leaf axils. The single large, with leafv, spiny, ruffled naked, wings without leafy wings, not spiny, slightly hairy, The with a bracts of the nodding, purple mm wide (very wide compared to other thistles) and is introduced ascending, almost flowerhead 1.3-2.5" (33-65 mm) across at the end. spiny the outer ones are reflexed. The well-drained, sunny areas with disturbed soil. The roots buds, as with fibrous. artichoke The midribs hearts, involucre are seeds 4-10 (achenes) have no parachute at the end. This species are tough and and inhabits dry, thistles. If you are going to peel thistle flower and pleasant to eat are of middling has quality the largest among in our region. The shoots are among our best and are sweet its are hardly worth even this species raw. The closely related Carduus acanthoides is much smaller. While edible, parts peeling. Both Carduus species are invasive. I Corduus acanthoides rosette. 77 Milk thistle Silybum marianum 2 cultivation This biennial for species is sparsely distributed in our area, where it occasionally stiff, spine-upped, are purple, and beneath the head there shiny green leaves with bright white medicinal veins. The uses. florets It is readily recognized by its variegated, escapes from -channeled bracts. The stems are grooved and usually is a whorl have sparse, of long, fine wool on the surface. The leaf blades/petioles/ midribs, young stalks, and roots are all edible-al- 164 though 1 have only eaten the leaves. 