BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY
12 Nipplewort
2
2
Lapsana communis
Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK CHECK: Hairy lobed leaves with depressed veins, almost all
triangular, coarsely toothed, terminal lobe; tiny heads of yellow flowers ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Winter annual with milky sap. Rosette leaves 3-7 (8-18 cm) long with
winged whitish midrib that has a few small, blunt, widely spaced lobes, and a much larger -)
terminal lobe containing most of the surface area. Lobe margins are hairy with large.
irregular, obtuse teeth tipped with white nipples. Blades are hairy on both surfaces with
deeply depressed veins on top; they are thin and velvety to the touch. Midrib D-shaped or bluntry triang ular
in cross section, not channeled, decreasing in length up the stem, densely covered with long. erect names
Stems erect, hollow, thin, roundish with very minor angles (especially in the lower part), 2.5 (50-180 cm)
tall and 3-9 mm thick, soft-hairy, branching in the upper half, which is sparsely leafed. Stem leaves become
progressively smaller, the petioles shorter, the terminal lobe more triangular. Their teeth have mucronate
tips. Uppermost leaves may be entire and nearly sessile. Inflorescence a loose, terminal panicle, the heads
on long, thin, straight, naked peduncles. Heads cylindrical, 5-8 mm long with 8-15 yellow ray florets spreading
7-11 mm across. The seeds have no parachute (pappus). They are borne inside a capsule-like enclosure formed
by dry bracts, which persist on dead stalks.
HABITAT: Moist, rich, disturbed soil in full to
partial shade. Pastures, backyards, gardens, and
especially dirt roads or trails through wooded
areas. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Gather young leaves from robust
rosettes, especially where crowding keeps them
off the ground, as their texture can hold dirt. These
are available mostly in spring, less so in summer
and fall. Use in salads or as a potherb. Tender
shoots with attached leaves, in late spring or early
summer, also make a nice cooked vegetable.
COMMENTS: This weed is widespread and spo-
radically abundant in much of our region. It is
better known and more appreciated by foragers
r Europe. where it is native.
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY 12 Nipplewort 2 2 Lapsana communis Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK CHECK: Hairy lobed leaves with depressed veins, almost all triangular, coarsely toothed, terminal lobe; tiny heads of yellow flowers ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Winter annual with milky sap. Rosette leaves 3-7 (8-18 cm) long with winged whitish midrib that has a few small, blunt, widely spaced lobes, and a much larger -) terminal lobe containing most of the surface area. Lobe margins are hairy with large. irregular, obtuse teeth tipped with white nipples. Blades are hairy on both surfaces with deeply depressed veins on top; they are thin and velvety to the touch. Midrib D-shaped or bluntry triang ular in cross section, not channeled, decreasing in length up the stem, densely covered with long. erect names Stems erect, hollow, thin, roundish with very minor angles (especially in the lower part), 2.5 (50-180 cm) tall and 3-9 mm thick, soft-hairy, branching in the upper half, which is sparsely leafed. Stem leaves become progressively smaller, the petioles shorter, the terminal lobe more triangular. Their teeth have mucronate tips. Uppermost leaves may be entire and nearly sessile. Inflorescence a loose, terminal panicle, the heads on long, thin, straight, naked peduncles. Heads cylindrical, 5-8 mm long with 8-15 yellow ray florets spreading 7-11 mm across. The seeds have no parachute (pappus). They are borne inside a capsule-like enclosure formed by dry bracts, which persist on dead stalks. HABITAT: Moist, rich, disturbed soil in full to partial shade. Pastures, backyards, gardens, and especially dirt roads or trails through wooded areas. Introduced. FOOD USE: Gather young leaves from robust rosettes, especially where crowding keeps them off the ground, as their texture can hold dirt. These are available mostly in spring, less so in summer and fall. Use in salads or as a potherb. Tender shoots with attached leaves, in late spring or early summer, also make a nice cooked vegetable. COMMENTS: This weed is widespread and spo- radically abundant in much of our region. It is better known and more appreciated by foragers r Europe. where it is native. 