BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY
13 Japanese hawksbeard
1
1
Youngia japonica Asteraceae (Composite family)
Deeply lobed basal leaves with a large terminal lobe; the are stem orange thin when and
wavy, QUICK hairy CHECK: and leafy near base; tight clusters of elongated heads that
closed. ID difficulty 2.
Winter annual with milky sap. Basal leaves numerous, to 8" (20 cm) deeply long,
DESCRIPTION: lobed with a large terminal lobe. Proximal lobes are smaller, widely spaced, The lobes
Rapidly
pinnately of them fully divided; distal lobes are broader and very close together. each
expandi
cut, some teeth and broad tips, occasionally rounded but usually obtusely angled,
with have broad claw-like projection. Both surfaces have soft, erect hairs. Midvein slightly depressed above and |
a The few evident smaller veins are also depressed above and protrude below. Petioles especially
10-60% hairy. of blade length, deeper than wide, rounded below, not channeled. Stems one to several per 1
erect, thin, leafy only in the lower third, purplish near the base, rounded with many fine ridges, hollow, not
usually curvy, 12-30" (30-76 cm) tall and 3-7 mm thick, dense with long hairs near the base but becoming a
hairless upward. Very small stalks are often present at the base of large ones. Branches minor and only i
inflorescence. Stem leaves alternate, few, only near the base. Inflorescence a tight panicle of small comp
heads on very short pedicels, many sessile or nearly
so. The heads are 3-5 mm across with ray florets that
are yellow when spread open, orange when closed (the
latter being more typical); the involucres are longer
than wide and purplish at the tip. Seed has a parachute.
HABITAT: Disturbed ground, often at least partly
shaded and moist. Gardens, clearings, fields, dirt
roads, trails, yards, construction sites. disturbed
woods. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Use the young stems and tender leaves
(if they are clean, which is rare) raw or cooked.
COMMENTS: Another of the many bitter greens in the
lettuce tribe of the aster family. This herb is spread-
ing quickly in the Southeast, where it is already an
abundant weed in many locations. AKA Asiatic false
hawksbeard, Crepis japonica.
366
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY 13 Japanese hawksbeard 1 1 Youngia japonica Asteraceae (Composite family) Deeply lobed basal leaves with a large terminal lobe; the are stem orange thin when and wavy, QUICK hairy CHECK: and leafy near base; tight clusters of elongated heads that closed. ID difficulty 2. Winter annual with milky sap. Basal leaves numerous, to 8" (20 cm) deeply long, DESCRIPTION: lobed with a large terminal lobe. Proximal lobes are smaller, widely spaced, The lobes Rapidly pinnately of them fully divided; distal lobes are broader and very close together. each expandi cut, some teeth and broad tips, occasionally rounded but usually obtusely angled, with have broad claw-like projection. Both surfaces have soft, erect hairs. Midvein slightly depressed above and | a The few evident smaller veins are also depressed above and protrude below. Petioles especially 10-60% hairy. of blade length, deeper than wide, rounded below, not channeled. Stems one to several per 1 erect, thin, leafy only in the lower third, purplish near the base, rounded with many fine ridges, hollow, not usually curvy, 12-30" (30-76 cm) tall and 3-7 mm thick, dense with long hairs near the base but becoming a hairless upward. Very small stalks are often present at the base of large ones. Branches minor and only i inflorescence. Stem leaves alternate, few, only near the base. Inflorescence a tight panicle of small comp heads on very short pedicels, many sessile or nearly so. The heads are 3-5 mm across with ray florets that are yellow when spread open, orange when closed (the latter being more typical); the involucres are longer than wide and purplish at the tip. Seed has a parachute. HABITAT: Disturbed ground, often at least partly shaded and moist. Gardens, clearings, fields, dirt roads, trails, yards, construction sites. disturbed woods. Introduced. FOOD USE: Use the young stems and tender leaves (if they are clean, which is rare) raw or cooked. COMMENTS: Another of the many bitter greens in the lettuce tribe of the aster family. This herb is spread- ing quickly in the Southeast, where it is already an abundant weed in many locations. AKA Asiatic false hawksbeard, Crepis japonica. 366 