1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
14 Carolina dandelion
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY
1
Pyrrhopappus
carolinianus
Asteraceae (Composite family)
UICK few leaves; CHECK: showy Rosette yellow of narrow flowerheads. dandelion-like ID difficulty leaves; 2. multiple branching starns
milky DESCRIPTION: Winter annual to short-lived perennial
almost sap. Basal leaves in a rosette, to 10" (25 cm) long, herb with
linear, sometimes nearly entire but usually with narrow.
narrow curved lobes projecting at right angles or slightly toward the scattered tip (not
is glossy toward and the base as in dandelion), usually withering by flowering. The
between hairless; the underside may have hairs along the midvein. Midvein upper surface
lobes, green and flat or raised above, rounded and light in color below. Second- winged
ary veins and veinlets are faint to obscure and flat, or those near
the leaf are tip faintly depressed. Margins lobed but not toothed.
Basal leaves are usually reported to have a petiole out don't see
one-I just see a very narrow blade or wing on each side of the
midrib, with occasional tiny tooth-like lobes. Stems to 3 11 m)
tall, erect to leaning, branching, thin and tough, often multiple per
rosette, finely grooved, hairless or nearly so near the base. finely
hairy toward the top (especially just below the flowerhead); with
few to many leaves. Stem leaves small, toothed, sessile. usually
clasping, with sharp, elongated, entire tips; the proximal margins
have a few large teeth or small lobes. Inflorescence 1-5 heads on
long peduncles, with a few long,
thin bracts behind the involu-
cre. Heads 1-1.8" (2.5-4.6 cm)
across when open, bright yel-
low, with ray flowers only, the
columns blackish. Seeds small,
elongated, with a paracnute,
forming a round fluffy head.
HABITAT: Well-drained sunny
sites: fields, roadsides, pastures,
sunny slopes, dunes. Native. in
FOOD USE: Another of the
dandelion-like bitter greens, the
young leaves are edible raw or
cooked. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Looks and tastes
a lot like a dandelion. out not
as good.
Related edible:
15 False dandelion
Pyrrhopappus multicaulis
False dandelion has broader basal leaves with lobes that
are much longer and closer together, persisting through
flowering. The stem leaves are larger and widely lobed,
the uppermost are small but often have long, very thin
lobes. This species is generally shorter and stouter than
P. carolinianus. the name, there are usually only 1-2
stems Despite these growing 10-20" (25-50 cm) tall and 6-12 mm the thick. base ridged. The
maroon, per zigzag, crown, nearly solid with a pinhole hollow, soft-hairy near
flavor of the greens is similar-bitter and dandelion-like.
1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, 14 Carolina dandelion LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY 1 Pyrrhopappus carolinianus Asteraceae (Composite family) UICK few leaves; CHECK: showy Rosette yellow of narrow flowerheads. dandelion-like ID difficulty leaves; 2. multiple branching starns milky DESCRIPTION: Winter annual to short-lived perennial almost sap. Basal leaves in a rosette, to 10" (25 cm) long, herb with linear, sometimes nearly entire but usually with narrow. narrow curved lobes projecting at right angles or slightly toward the scattered tip (not is glossy toward and the base as in dandelion), usually withering by flowering. The between hairless; the underside may have hairs along the midvein. Midvein upper surface lobes, green and flat or raised above, rounded and light in color below. Second- winged ary veins and veinlets are faint to obscure and flat, or those near the leaf are tip faintly depressed. Margins lobed but not toothed. Basal leaves are usually reported to have a petiole out don't see one-I just see a very narrow blade or wing on each side of the midrib, with occasional tiny tooth-like lobes. Stems to 3 11 m) tall, erect to leaning, branching, thin and tough, often multiple per rosette, finely grooved, hairless or nearly so near the base. finely hairy toward the top (especially just below the flowerhead); with few to many leaves. Stem leaves small, toothed, sessile. usually clasping, with sharp, elongated, entire tips; the proximal margins have a few large teeth or small lobes. Inflorescence 1-5 heads on long peduncles, with a few long, thin bracts behind the involu- cre. Heads 1-1.8" (2.5-4.6 cm) across when open, bright yel- low, with ray flowers only, the columns blackish. Seeds small, elongated, with a paracnute, forming a round fluffy head. HABITAT: Well-drained sunny sites: fields, roadsides, pastures, sunny slopes, dunes. Native. in FOOD USE: Another of the dandelion-like bitter greens, the young leaves are edible raw or cooked. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Looks and tastes a lot like a dandelion. out not as good. Related edible: 15 False dandelion Pyrrhopappus multicaulis False dandelion has broader basal leaves with lobes that are much longer and closer together, persisting through flowering. The stem leaves are larger and widely lobed, the uppermost are small but often have long, very thin lobes. This species is generally shorter and stouter than P. carolinianus. the name, there are usually only 1-2 stems Despite these growing 10-20" (25-50 cm) tall and 6-12 mm the thick. base ridged. The maroon, per zigzag, crown, nearly solid with a pinhole hollow, soft-hairy near flavor of the greens is similar-bitter and dandelion-like. 