BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY
16 Chicory
Cichorium intybus 2 Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK NEC 16: Dandelion like leaves with erect hairs on the midvein; bright blue
flower heads on nearly leafless stalks. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a fleshy, light brown taproot, on larger plants developing
multiple crowns. Latex white but dilute. Basal leaves persist almost to flowering, 5-14"
(13-36 cm) long and 1.5-4" (4-10 wide, broadest near the tip and tapered to the base,
deeply lobed in the proximal 2/3, the lobes curving back toward the base. Lobes and
unlobed margins have scattered teeth. The upper surface has erect hair; the underside has more. Lateral
veins numerous, at broad angles, nearly flat on top and slightly protruding below. Midrib flat above and gently
rounded below, strongly offset by color, usually whitish but often purple, with dense, erect hair on both sides,
winged or leafy to the base, where the wings are strongly upturned. Stem to 5' (1.5 m) tall and 12 mm thick,
usually single per crown, erect, zigzag, the upper part widely branching, roundish with angles or ridges (often
purple-topped), the surface green, densely to sparsely coated with erect hairs (more near the base); cross
section with a small, non-round hollow. Stem leaves alternate, sessile, clasping; they are large, crowded, and
lobed near the base but become much smaller, sparser, and unlobed toward the top. Upper branches are naked
except for small, lanceolate bracts with sharp purple tips under each head. Flowerheads widely scattered
along stem and branches, sessile, in groups of up to 3, not opening simultaneously, 1.5-2.5" (4-6 cm) across
with ray florets only, these light blue with a ragged 5-toothed tip. Seeds have a tiny hair tuft but no parachute.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Dandelion leaves lack the erect hairs on the midrib.
HABITAT: Roadsides, pastures, old fields, yards. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Roots of first-year plants can be eaten cooked, but older ones become much tougher. Young or old
roots can be dried and roasted until brown, then ground and used to brew a coffee-like beverage. Young spring
leaves can be used raw or cooked as a potherb. Aim for clean ones because the hairs make them hard to wash.
COMMENTS: The bitterness of the leaves is sometimes intense but varies greatly. Large, lush leaves just
before the stem bolts, especially on rich soil, are best. Chicory has long been a popular wild vegetable, and
available commercially.
a variety of milder cultivated forms have been developed for their roots and leaves. Roasted chicory root is
368
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY 16 Chicory Cichorium intybus 2 Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK NEC 16: Dandelion like leaves with erect hairs on the midvein; bright blue flower heads on nearly leafless stalks. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a fleshy, light brown taproot, on larger plants developing multiple crowns. Latex white but dilute. Basal leaves persist almost to flowering, 5-14" (13-36 cm) long and 1.5-4" (4-10 wide, broadest near the tip and tapered to the base, deeply lobed in the proximal 2/3, the lobes curving back toward the base. Lobes and unlobed margins have scattered teeth. The upper surface has erect hair; the underside has more. Lateral veins numerous, at broad angles, nearly flat on top and slightly protruding below. Midrib flat above and gently rounded below, strongly offset by color, usually whitish but often purple, with dense, erect hair on both sides, winged or leafy to the base, where the wings are strongly upturned. Stem to 5' (1.5 m) tall and 12 mm thick, usually single per crown, erect, zigzag, the upper part widely branching, roundish with angles or ridges (often purple-topped), the surface green, densely to sparsely coated with erect hairs (more near the base); cross section with a small, non-round hollow. Stem leaves alternate, sessile, clasping; they are large, crowded, and lobed near the base but become much smaller, sparser, and unlobed toward the top. Upper branches are naked except for small, lanceolate bracts with sharp purple tips under each head. Flowerheads widely scattered along stem and branches, sessile, in groups of up to 3, not opening simultaneously, 1.5-2.5" (4-6 cm) across with ray florets only, these light blue with a ragged 5-toothed tip. Seeds have a tiny hair tuft but no parachute. CONFUSING PLANTS: Dandelion leaves lack the erect hairs on the midrib. HABITAT: Roadsides, pastures, old fields, yards. Introduced. FOOD USE: Roots of first-year plants can be eaten cooked, but older ones become much tougher. Young or old roots can be dried and roasted until brown, then ground and used to brew a coffee-like beverage. Young spring leaves can be used raw or cooked as a potherb. Aim for clean ones because the hairs make them hard to wash. COMMENTS: The bitterness of the leaves is sometimes intense but varies greatly. Large, lush leaves just before the stem bolts, especially on rich soil, are best. Chicory has long been a popular wild vegetable, and available commercially. a variety of milder cultivated forms have been developed for their roots and leaves. Roasted chicory root is 368 