omposite e family).
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LOBED STEM LEAVES
SOW-THISTLE
OR DIVIDED, ALTERNATE, SAP MILKY
[I]
NG-439
genus Sonchus
Asteraceae (Composite family)
nowerheads UICK CHECK: in terminal Erect herbs clusters with of sharply 3-12. ID pointed difficulty teeth 1. or spines the
COLLECTIVE Basal leaves to DESCRIPTION: 12" (30 cm) long Erect and herbs 4" (10 to cm) 6' (2 wide, m) tall, with white milky sap. Form always taller than
ary pinnately veins and lobed, veinlets the lobes broad-based and triangular. The wider surfaces toward the tip and tapered to the base, usually wide
without outward hairs rather than for are ward, depressed terminating above. in Margins a sharp point erratically with toothed bristle are hairless along the or full faintly length, hairy the below. teeth pointing Second-
inflorescence. or Stem spines. leaves Stems thick-walled, hollow, to 0.8" (2 cm) a thick, or hairless, spine. Midvein strongly keeled below,
(called auricles). alternate, similar to the basal but smaller, the rarely branching below the
low peduncles with Inflorescence one or more panicles in the upper part of the bases plant, clasping with the stem with lobes
overlapping gland-tipped hairs. Heads 0.6-2" (1.5-5 wide, bulging at the 3-16 with heads on hol
elongated scales, containing 40-250 bright yellow ray florets, ripening to a flattened base, seed shaped many narrow like an
teardrop with a white parachute at the end.
CONFUSING each with PLANTS: Wild lettuces (genus Lactuca) tend to have smaller heads in much
on bottom of the midvein, and many species have untoothed sections of leaf margin.
the fewer florets, and not all species have bright yellow flowers. Lettuces usually have greater hairs or number, spines
17 Common sow-thistle
Sonchus oleraceus
3
2
QUICK CHECK: Stout-stemmed sow-thistle with small heads; deeply lobed leaves with
an arrowhead tip; clasping lobes triangular.
DESCRIPTION: Annual or winter annual 8-80" (20-200 cm) tall. Leaves deeply pinnately
lobed, the side lobes often long and narrow, the terminal lobe large, broad, and arrowhead-
shaped. Sparsely hairy below. Teeth sharp and faintly stiff. Midribs mostly greenish to
purple. Clasping basal lobes (auricles) are pointed and triangular. Upper leaves are shorter
but usually proportionately wider. Stem 0.1-1" (2-25 mm) thick, fleshy, hollow, strongly ridged, purplish. hairless
with light bloom, leafy, rarely branching in the lower half. Inflorescence an umbel-like cluster (sometimes
compound) of 3-16 heads on peduncles of variable length, the open heads 0.6-0.9" (15-23 mm) across.
HABITAT: Disturbed, rich soil; yards, gardens, city lots, crop fields, roadsides. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Tender leaves can be gathered from spring through summer (most abundant in early summer) and
eaten raw or cooked. Tender stems, primarily available in early summer, can be peeled and used as a vegetable
COMMENTS: This is the best of our three sow-thistles. It grows largest in warm climates during mild winters.
Where it is both large and abundant, it is one of the best greens to know.
369
omposite e family). BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LOBED STEM LEAVES SOW-THISTLE OR DIVIDED, ALTERNATE, SAP MILKY [I] NG-439 genus Sonchus Asteraceae (Composite family) nowerheads UICK CHECK: in terminal Erect herbs clusters with of sharply 3-12. ID pointed difficulty teeth 1. or spines the COLLECTIVE Basal leaves to DESCRIPTION: 12" (30 cm) long Erect and herbs 4" (10 to cm) 6' (2 wide, m) tall, with white milky sap. Form always taller than ary pinnately veins and lobed, veinlets the lobes broad-based and triangular. The wider surfaces toward the tip and tapered to the base, usually wide without outward hairs rather than for are ward, depressed terminating above. in Margins a sharp point erratically with toothed bristle are hairless along the or full faintly length, hairy the below. teeth pointing Second- inflorescence. or Stem spines. leaves Stems thick-walled, hollow, to 0.8" (2 cm) a thick, or hairless, spine. Midvein strongly keeled below, (called auricles). alternate, similar to the basal but smaller, the rarely branching below the low peduncles with Inflorescence one or more panicles in the upper part of the bases plant, clasping with the stem with lobes overlapping gland-tipped hairs. Heads 0.6-2" (1.5-5 wide, bulging at the 3-16 with heads on hol elongated scales, containing 40-250 bright yellow ray florets, ripening to a flattened base, seed shaped many narrow like an teardrop with a white parachute at the end. CONFUSING each with PLANTS: Wild lettuces (genus Lactuca) tend to have smaller heads in much on bottom of the midvein, and many species have untoothed sections of leaf margin. the fewer florets, and not all species have bright yellow flowers. Lettuces usually have greater hairs or number, spines 17 Common sow-thistle Sonchus oleraceus 3 2 QUICK CHECK: Stout-stemmed sow-thistle with small heads; deeply lobed leaves with an arrowhead tip; clasping lobes triangular. DESCRIPTION: Annual or winter annual 8-80" (20-200 cm) tall. Leaves deeply pinnately lobed, the side lobes often long and narrow, the terminal lobe large, broad, and arrowhead- shaped. Sparsely hairy below. Teeth sharp and faintly stiff. Midribs mostly greenish to purple. Clasping basal lobes (auricles) are pointed and triangular. Upper leaves are shorter but usually proportionately wider. Stem 0.1-1" (2-25 mm) thick, fleshy, hollow, strongly ridged, purplish. hairless with light bloom, leafy, rarely branching in the lower half. Inflorescence an umbel-like cluster (sometimes compound) of 3-16 heads on peduncles of variable length, the open heads 0.6-0.9" (15-23 mm) across. HABITAT: Disturbed, rich soil; yards, gardens, city lots, crop fields, roadsides. Introduced. FOOD USE: Tender leaves can be gathered from spring through summer (most abundant in early summer) and eaten raw or cooked. Tender stems, primarily available in early summer, can be peeled and used as a vegetable COMMENTS: This is the best of our three sow-thistles. It grows largest in warm climates during mild winters. Where it is both large and abundant, it is one of the best greens to know. 369 