1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY
WILD
LETTUCE
NG-429
genus
Lactuca
Asteraceae (Composite family)
iall UICK stalk CHECK: with a panicle Dandelion-like of numerous leaves small and flowerheads. milky sap; midvein ID difficulty below 2. is keeled with arect hairs OF prickles:
leaves COLLECTIVE in rosette, DESCRIPTION: Biennials or perennials with milky sap, at maturity much taller
lobed, sessile a much longer than wide and thicker toward the tips, the margins than wide Basal
keeled or with a winged petiole. Midribs prominent and offset by color but scarcely erratically toothed and/or
sharply work of below, the keel usually with erect hairs or spines. Secondary veins few, soon branching depressed into above:
slightly depressed veinlets. Stems erect, rounded, mostly hollow, not ridged or angled, hairless. a net-
unbranched except in the inflorescence. Stem leaves sessile or on a winged petiole, alternate, deeply lobed leafy, to
entire. Inflorescence a terminal panicle above the leaves with several to numerous heads. Heads (early to late
summer) 5-12 mm across when open (except for blue lettuce, which has heads about 25 mm), with only strap-
like ray florets. Fruit a flattened seed (achene), narrowed and beak-like at the tip, with an attached parachute.
CONFUSING PLANTS: There are no obvious macro-features that clearly differentiate all lettuces from all
sow-thistles. All of our lettuces normally have less than 50 florets in a head (and some average 10-15), while
our sow-thistles all average more than 80. (But nobody wants to count florets!) The seeds of lettuces are
beak-like at the tip, while those of sow-thistles are not. Luckily, both groups are edible.
FOOD USE: Tender leaves can be eaten raw or cooked in spring. The best are found in the upright cluster of
new leaves in the center of the rosette just before the stem elongates (bolts); this is analogous to a "head" of
domestic lettuce. Shoots can also be eaten in early summer. The flavor is highly variable among the species,
but those with browning latex tend to taste better.
COMMENTS: This genus includes some of the most common (and tallest!) herbaceous plants in our region.
The flavor of lettuces is highly variable, so differentiating the species is important for culinary reasons. I have
included the most common and widespread species here, but there are others. Technical manuals usually
require mature seeds (cypselae) for ID, but I don't focus on that feature because mature lettuces are not good
eating. This group contains the ancestor of domestic lettuce (L. serriola) but some other species are actually
better. Members of this genus contain sedatives in various amounts, so maybe don't drive after your big
salad. WARNING: A Eurasian species, L. virosa, has high enough concentrations of sedatives that it is used
medicinally and as an intoxicant. It is dangerous in large quantities and is occasionally found as an escape
in North America. I have eaten every species covered here without any notable effect.
Lactuca canadensis
3
3
20 Good lettuce
QUICK CHECK: Leaves with long, thin lobes and few to no teeth on the margins; yellow
flowers; latex turns brown.
DESCRIPTION: Biennial. Latex rapidly turns brown. Rosette leaves long and narrow, rosette usu-
ally with widely spaced, long, narrow, pointed lobes with few teeth. (The youngest teeth.)
leaves are broader with more
The terminal section of the leaf is also
long, narrow, and pointed. The blade is hairless. Veins scattered above
flat to faintly depressed. The midrib usually has
are soft, wavy hairs on top and on the keel. Stem bloom-coated, 6-10' (2-3
long, tall, solid or with a small hollow, hairless, from top
often Stem leaves alternate, typically 5-12" (13-30 elongated
m) purplish, with leaves distributed nearly evenly cm)
to bottom. and deeply lobed with few teeth and narrow, plants
long The lobes decrease in number upward; on some scattered
tips. leaves are unlobed and nearly entire Inflorescence with of
upper Blades are often deeply folded. broom-like
bristles. strongly ascending branches forming a small yellow
many branch with a panicle of numerous needle-
heads. top, each The seeds have the parachute attached by a
like beak. (Continued on the next page.)
Good lettuce rosette just before bolting.
371
1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY WILD LETTUCE NG-429 genus Lactuca Asteraceae (Composite family) iall UICK stalk CHECK: with a panicle Dandelion-like of numerous leaves small and flowerheads. milky sap; midvein ID difficulty below 2. is keeled with arect hairs OF prickles: leaves COLLECTIVE in rosette, DESCRIPTION: Biennials or perennials with milky sap, at maturity much taller lobed, sessile a much longer than wide and thicker toward the tips, the margins than wide Basal keeled or with a winged petiole. Midribs prominent and offset by color but scarcely erratically toothed and/or sharply work of below, the keel usually with erect hairs or spines. Secondary veins few, soon branching depressed into above: slightly depressed veinlets. Stems erect, rounded, mostly hollow, not ridged or angled, hairless. a net- unbranched except in the inflorescence. Stem leaves sessile or on a winged petiole, alternate, deeply lobed leafy, to entire. Inflorescence a terminal panicle above the leaves with several to numerous heads. Heads (early to late summer) 5-12 mm across when open (except for blue lettuce, which has heads about 25 mm), with only strap- like ray florets. Fruit a flattened seed (achene), narrowed and beak-like at the tip, with an attached parachute. CONFUSING PLANTS: There are no obvious macro-features that clearly differentiate all lettuces from all sow-thistles. All of our lettuces normally have less than 50 florets in a head (and some average 10-15), while our sow-thistles all average more than 80. (But nobody wants to count florets!) The seeds of lettuces are beak-like at the tip, while those of sow-thistles are not. Luckily, both groups are edible. FOOD USE: Tender leaves can be eaten raw or cooked in spring. The best are found in the upright cluster of new leaves in the center of the rosette just before the stem elongates (bolts); this is analogous to a "head" of domestic lettuce. Shoots can also be eaten in early summer. The flavor is highly variable among the species, but those with browning latex tend to taste better. COMMENTS: This genus includes some of the most common (and tallest!) herbaceous plants in our region. The flavor of lettuces is highly variable, so differentiating the species is important for culinary reasons. I have included the most common and widespread species here, but there are others. Technical manuals usually require mature seeds (cypselae) for ID, but I don't focus on that feature because mature lettuces are not good eating. This group contains the ancestor of domestic lettuce (L. serriola) but some other species are actually better. Members of this genus contain sedatives in various amounts, so maybe don't drive after your big salad. WARNING: A Eurasian species, L. virosa, has high enough concentrations of sedatives that it is used medicinally and as an intoxicant. It is dangerous in large quantities and is occasionally found as an escape in North America. I have eaten every species covered here without any notable effect. Lactuca canadensis 3 3 20 Good lettuce QUICK CHECK: Leaves with long, thin lobes and few to no teeth on the margins; yellow flowers; latex turns brown. DESCRIPTION: Biennial. Latex rapidly turns brown. Rosette leaves long and narrow, rosette usu- ally with widely spaced, long, narrow, pointed lobes with few teeth. (The youngest teeth.) leaves are broader with more The terminal section of the leaf is also long, narrow, and pointed. The blade is hairless. Veins scattered above flat to faintly depressed. The midrib usually has are soft, wavy hairs on top and on the keel. Stem bloom-coated, 6-10' (2-3 long, tall, solid or with a small hollow, hairless, from top often Stem leaves alternate, typically 5-12" (13-30 elongated m) purplish, with leaves distributed nearly evenly cm) to bottom. and deeply lobed with few teeth and narrow, plants long The lobes decrease in number upward; on some scattered tips. leaves are unlobed and nearly entire Inflorescence with of upper Blades are often deeply folded. broom-like bristles. strongly ascending branches forming a small yellow many branch with a panicle of numerous needle- heads. top, each The seeds have the parachute attached by a like beak. (Continued on the next page.) Good lettuce rosette just before bolting. 371 