BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY
1
2
18 Prickly sow-thistle Sonchus asper
QUICK CHECK Thick stemmed sow thistle with small heads, shallow lobes, stiff
prickles and ounded anricles where the leaves meet the stem.
Erect annual or winter annual growing 2-5' (60-150 cm) high. Leaves under mostly the
DESCRIPTION: lobed. faintly hairy below, with wavy, downcurved margins, especially Midribs mostly
shallowly hard spines. The clasping leaf base (auricle) is curled downward and rounded. with
Stem 0.4-1" (1-2.5 cm) thick, hairless, hollow, angled
white. usually 6 flat sides, often tinged reddish. Inflorescence an umbel-like cluster (some-
times compound) of 3-16 heads, the peduncles of varying lengths, the open heads
0.6-0.9" (15-23 cm) across.
HABITAT: Disturbed soil such as gardens, roadsides, building sites, and crop fields.
Introduced.
FOOD USE: The peeled stalk of vigorously growing young plants in spring or early
summer is good raw or cooked. It is crisp, mild, and sweet, but many specimens are too
small to bother with. The leaves can
be eaten raw or cooked when they
are very young and tender. Cooking
reduces the prickliness, and blend-
ing in a smoothie eliminates it.
COMMENTS: This is the only sow-
thistle that has armor worth wor-
rying about. If you need gloves to
pull it from your garden, it's this
species.
19 Perennial sow-thistle Sonchus arvensis
2
QUICK CHECK: Sow-thistle with thin stems sparsely leafed near the top; lower leaves
long-tapered at the base, teeth not prickly; wide-spreading inflorescence and large heads.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by rhizome to form colonies. Basal leaves erect in
heavy competition, long and narrow with a few shallow lobes, long-tapered at the base,
the tips mostly blunt, the midribs mostly whitish. Margins with fine, sharp, but not prickly
teeth. Stems 2-6' (60-180 cm) tall and 5-11 mm thick, unbranched until the
top, smooth, rounded, mostly hairless below the inflorescence. Stem leaves
smaller, few and reduced in the upper part. Inflorescence a large, loose
Heads panicle with slender branches and long peduncles, usually gland-hairy.
broad, dandelion-like, 1.2-2" (3-5 cm) across.
HABITAT: Disturbed areas in full
sun with moist to moderately dry
soil: fields, meadows, pastures, road-
sides, vacant lots, gardens, seashores.
Introduced.
FOOD USE: Tender leaves in spring
through early summer can be eaten
fried. raw or cooked. I especially like them
COMMENTS: This is usually the most
abundant of the SOW thistles in rural
areas and fields II is the one most com
with monly seen blooming along highways
summer Some have argued that
lialive AKA field sow-thistle
370
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY 1 2 18 Prickly sow-thistle Sonchus asper QUICK CHECK Thick stemmed sow thistle with small heads, shallow lobes, stiff prickles and ounded anricles where the leaves meet the stem. Erect annual or winter annual growing 2-5' (60-150 cm) high. Leaves under mostly the DESCRIPTION: lobed. faintly hairy below, with wavy, downcurved margins, especially Midribs mostly shallowly hard spines. The clasping leaf base (auricle) is curled downward and rounded. with Stem 0.4-1" (1-2.5 cm) thick, hairless, hollow, angled white. usually 6 flat sides, often tinged reddish. Inflorescence an umbel-like cluster (some- times compound) of 3-16 heads, the peduncles of varying lengths, the open heads 0.6-0.9" (15-23 cm) across. HABITAT: Disturbed soil such as gardens, roadsides, building sites, and crop fields. Introduced. FOOD USE: The peeled stalk of vigorously growing young plants in spring or early summer is good raw or cooked. It is crisp, mild, and sweet, but many specimens are too small to bother with. The leaves can be eaten raw or cooked when they are very young and tender. Cooking reduces the prickliness, and blend- ing in a smoothie eliminates it. COMMENTS: This is the only sow- thistle that has armor worth wor- rying about. If you need gloves to pull it from your garden, it's this species. 19 Perennial sow-thistle Sonchus arvensis 2 QUICK CHECK: Sow-thistle with thin stems sparsely leafed near the top; lower leaves long-tapered at the base, teeth not prickly; wide-spreading inflorescence and large heads. DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by rhizome to form colonies. Basal leaves erect in heavy competition, long and narrow with a few shallow lobes, long-tapered at the base, the tips mostly blunt, the midribs mostly whitish. Margins with fine, sharp, but not prickly teeth. Stems 2-6' (60-180 cm) tall and 5-11 mm thick, unbranched until the top, smooth, rounded, mostly hairless below the inflorescence. Stem leaves smaller, few and reduced in the upper part. Inflorescence a large, loose Heads panicle with slender branches and long peduncles, usually gland-hairy. broad, dandelion-like, 1.2-2" (3-5 cm) across. HABITAT: Disturbed areas in full sun with moist to moderately dry soil: fields, meadows, pastures, road- sides, vacant lots, gardens, seashores. Introduced. FOOD USE: Tender leaves in spring through early summer can be eaten fried. raw or cooked. I especially like them COMMENTS: This is usually the most abundant of the SOW thistles in rural areas and fields II is the one most com with monly seen blooming along highways summer Some have argued that lialive AKA field sow-thistle 370 