mm
0
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY
22 Woodland lettuce+ Lactuca floridana
1
MICK CHECK: Tall lettuce, the leaves with a few broad, blunt labos
di broad, spearhead-like tips; small flowerheads with bluish Haways
DESCRIPTION: Biennial with white latex. Rosette leaves to 12" (30 cm) long with 0 winged
petiole that is sparsely hairy below, especially on the midvein The midvein above IS flat,
smaller veins are flat or faintly depressed. Stem 5-13 (1.5-4m) tall, straight, unbranched.
smooth and round, hollow with thin walls, usually reddish, hairless. Stem leaves 'ypir ally
have a winged petiole and a few broad-spreading lobes with small teeth along the margins Sometimes a odir
of triangular lobes at the leaf base clasps the stem, but usually these are lacking. Inflorescence a banicle with
numerous small heads, the rays purplish to light blue, similar to bitter lettuce but darker and with the heads
more widely spaced. The seed has a whitish parachute directly attached to a narrowed 'ip.
H BITAT: Most common on well-drained rich soils in partial sun. Likes forest edges, roadsides, and disturbed
openings in oak-hickory forests and savannahs. Native.
COI MENTS: At maturity this must be the lankiest, flimsiest thing in the woods, like if you wanted to build
the tallest plant possible using the smallest amount of cellulose. This species largely replaces L biennis in the
southern US, but tastes only slightly better. Conservation 2.
mm 0 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY 22 Woodland lettuce+ Lactuca floridana 1 MICK CHECK: Tall lettuce, the leaves with a few broad, blunt labos di broad, spearhead-like tips; small flowerheads with bluish Haways DESCRIPTION: Biennial with white latex. Rosette leaves to 12" (30 cm) long with 0 winged petiole that is sparsely hairy below, especially on the midvein The midvein above IS flat, smaller veins are flat or faintly depressed. Stem 5-13 (1.5-4m) tall, straight, unbranched. smooth and round, hollow with thin walls, usually reddish, hairless. Stem leaves 'ypir ally have a winged petiole and a few broad-spreading lobes with small teeth along the margins Sometimes a odir of triangular lobes at the leaf base clasps the stem, but usually these are lacking. Inflorescence a banicle with numerous small heads, the rays purplish to light blue, similar to bitter lettuce but darker and with the heads more widely spaced. The seed has a whitish parachute directly attached to a narrowed 'ip. H BITAT: Most common on well-drained rich soils in partial sun. Likes forest edges, roadsides, and disturbed openings in oak-hickory forests and savannahs. Native. COI MENTS: At maturity this must be the lankiest, flimsiest thing in the woods, like if you wanted to build the tallest plant possible using the smallest amount of cellulose. This species largely replaces L biennis in the southern US, but tastes only slightly better. Conservation 2. 