20 Good Forest lettuce borders. fields, (continued) roadsides, prairies. logging sites; disturbed ground in full sun to light Conser- shade.
HABITAT: COMMENTS: Native This is the best tasting wild lettuce--in fact I prefer it over any cultivated leaf lettuce.
vation 2. AKA Canada lettuce, yellow wild lettuce.
Good lettuce can be identified by its long, narrow leaf tips
and the rapidly browning latex. The flowers are bright yel-
low, much like those of prickly lettuce (plant 26).
21 Hairy lettuce Lactuca hirsuta
2
2
This plant is similar but averages shorter than L. canadensis. The leaves have long, narrow
lobes with large teeth, and are less pointed than the lobes of good lettuce. The midrib has
long, thin hairs on both sides, and the stem is also usually hairy and often reddish. Hairy
lettuce has larger flower heads than good lettuce and the florets are usually orange. The
latex turns faintly brown, often slowly.
HABITAT: Disturbed dry forests and savannahs, especially rocky slopes.
COMMENTS: The flavor is almost as good as that of its taller cousin. Conservation 2.
514
20 Good Forest lettuce borders. fields, (continued) roadsides, prairies. logging sites; disturbed ground in full sun to light Conser- shade. HABITAT: COMMENTS: Native This is the best tasting wild lettuce--in fact I prefer it over any cultivated leaf lettuce. vation 2. AKA Canada lettuce, yellow wild lettuce. Good lettuce can be identified by its long, narrow leaf tips and the rapidly browning latex. The flowers are bright yel- low, much like those of prickly lettuce (plant 26). 21 Hairy lettuce Lactuca hirsuta 2 2 This plant is similar but averages shorter than L. canadensis. The leaves have long, narrow lobes with large teeth, and are less pointed than the lobes of good lettuce. The midrib has long, thin hairs on both sides, and the stem is also usually hairy and often reddish. Hairy lettuce has larger flower heads than good lettuce and the florets are usually orange. The latex turns faintly brown, often slowly. HABITAT: Disturbed dry forests and savannahs, especially rocky slopes. COMMENTS: The flavor is almost as good as that of its taller cousin. Conservation 2. 514 