BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY
1
1
Bitter lettuce Lactuca biennis
QUICK 23 CHFC IL Very tall lettuce with white milk and bluish-white flowers; leaves hairy
below with broad. Basal leaves with several broad lobes scattered per side,
spearhead-shaped tips,
DESCRIPTION: Biennial with white latex. spearhead-shaped. The upper surface has purplish (not
the lobes toothed. the leaf tips longer broadly erect hairs on the veins. Midvein green to than any of our
white short hairs: as in many the underside lettuces), has flat above. Veinlets (2-4m), depressed rounded, above-more hollow, the so walls thin, the surface uppermo bloom
other species. Stems Stem extremely leaves tall, alternate 6-13' and sessile, similar to the basal than leaves wide, with except numerous the smal
become linear and blue entire. to nearly white or faintly an yellowish-blue. The seed "form (achene) has a which has
and mostly hairless. Inflorescence enormous panicle, taller light brown pa
the florets light its especially the Ohio River Valley, one finds integrifolia," altogether-and
leaves (In some and parts often of yellowish range, flowers. At a glance this will appear to be another species
it is, but it tastes the same.)
HABITAT: Disturbed areas in full sun to shade, espe-
cially openings in forests caused by construction,
logging, or wind storms. Native.
COMMENTS: This is our largest wild lettuce-lonce
measured a specimen 16' 4" tall, and 9' is about aver-
age. The greens are usually extremely bitter, but they
can be boiled and drained, or fried, to alleviate the
bitterness. The shoots can be very tender but have
an odd bitter-metallic flavor. To enjoy them you need
to boil and drain the water. Conservation 1. AKA tall
blue lettuce.
374
For the " biennis tall plant
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY 1 1 Bitter lettuce Lactuca biennis QUICK 23 CHFC IL Very tall lettuce with white milk and bluish-white flowers; leaves hairy below with broad. Basal leaves with several broad lobes scattered per side, spearhead-shaped tips, DESCRIPTION: Biennial with white latex. spearhead-shaped. The upper surface has purplish (not the lobes toothed. the leaf tips longer broadly erect hairs on the veins. Midvein green to than any of our white short hairs: as in many the underside lettuces), has flat above. Veinlets (2-4m), depressed rounded, above-more hollow, the so walls thin, the surface uppermo bloom other species. Stems Stem extremely leaves tall, alternate 6-13' and sessile, similar to the basal than leaves wide, with except numerous the smal become linear and blue entire. to nearly white or faintly an yellowish-blue. The seed "form (achene) has a which has and mostly hairless. Inflorescence enormous panicle, taller light brown pa the florets light its especially the Ohio River Valley, one finds integrifolia," altogether-and leaves (In some and parts often of yellowish range, flowers. At a glance this will appear to be another species it is, but it tastes the same.) HABITAT: Disturbed areas in full sun to shade, espe- cially openings in forests caused by construction, logging, or wind storms. Native. COMMENTS: This is our largest wild lettuce-lonce measured a specimen 16' 4" tall, and 9' is about aver- age. The greens are usually extremely bitter, but they can be boiled and drained, or fried, to alleviate the bitterness. The shoots can be very tender but have an odd bitter-metallic flavor. To enjoy them you need to boil and drain the water. Conservation 1. AKA tall blue lettuce. 374 For the " biennis tall plant 