BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES
24 Blue lettuce
LOBED OR DIVIDED, ALTERNATE, SAP MILKY
Lactuca pulchella
1
QUICK entire in CHECK: the terminal Belly-high third; lettuce heads large with and white purple-blue. latex, spreading by rhizome; the 19710-
Rosettes ESCRIPTION: wither Perennial spreading by deep rhizomes to form
long, with by flowering. Basal leaves gently tapered loose colonies; latex white
that curve narrow toward the the tip pointed. Margins have erratic large teeth at the or base, narrow, 6-8" (15-20 cm)
whitish and the blades base-but the terminal third or 50 is entire. The pointed lobes
tall and 7-10 mm thick, have erect, no hairs or spines. Veins are nearly flat midvein on both is sides. distinctly Stems
leaves alternate, usually single, hairless, unbranched, ridged, 2-4 (60-120
elongated and willow-like. sessile, 3-5" (8-13 cm) long, the lower ones similar to basal leafy leaves, to the the inflorescence. Stem
1" (2.5 cm) wide, Inflorescence a panicle of 16-50 heads, larger than those upper mostly entire.
each with 18 bracts and 19-21 purple-blue florets. The parachute of is other attached lettuces, to the spreading seed by
a stout but elongated beak
HABITAT: Full sun in
fertile soil with medium
soil moisture. Common in
meadows and roadsides in
the Great Plains, especially
along waterways. Native;
adventive further east. (Its
ecology is similar to peren-
nial sow thistle, with which
it is often found.)
Comments This is our only
lettuce that is a long-lived
perennial spreading by rhi-
zome. It is one of the more
bitter species. Conserva-
tion AKA Lactuca totarica.
25 Willow-leaf lettuce
Lactuca saligna
1
QUICK CHECK: Short lettuce with long, narrow leaves with arrow-like bases; small
yellow heads in spike-like clusters.
DESCRIPTION: Winter annual with white latex. Basal
leaves and lower stem leaves to 6" (15 cm) long, pin-
nately lobed, the lobes long, narrow, and widely spaced,
the margins with a few prickle-like teeth. The surface is hairless and the veins
flat above and below. Midvein whitish, flat above, the under side protruding
and keeled, usually with scattered prickles. Stem to 34" (85 cm) tall and
12 mm thick, single or clumped (branched at the base), erect to strongly lean-
ing, hairless, round, with light bloom, the plant tall and columnar when young
but often becoming branchy at maturity. Stem leaves held almost vertically or
appressed, clasping with two small, pointed lobes at the base; above the base
the blades are often narrow, elongated, and entire or nearly so. Uppermost
leaves are very small. Inflorescence a panicle with long, spike-like branches,
heads small, 8-10 mm across in bloom, usually with less than 18 yellow body.
the florets. Seeds have a long thread-like beak about twice as long as the
HABITAT: Disturbed, dry, sunny sites with low fertility such as roadsides.
vacant lots, pavement cracks, etc. Introduced.
Willow lettuce is often too small to bother with, then except the
under COMMENTS: better growing conditions where it is robust-and even
food quality is mediocre.
375
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES 24 Blue lettuce LOBED OR DIVIDED, ALTERNATE, SAP MILKY Lactuca pulchella 1 QUICK entire in CHECK: the terminal Belly-high third; lettuce heads large with and white purple-blue. latex, spreading by rhizome; the 19710- Rosettes ESCRIPTION: wither Perennial spreading by deep rhizomes to form long, with by flowering. Basal leaves gently tapered loose colonies; latex white that curve narrow toward the the tip pointed. Margins have erratic large teeth at the or base, narrow, 6-8" (15-20 cm) whitish and the blades base-but the terminal third or 50 is entire. The pointed lobes tall and 7-10 mm thick, have erect, no hairs or spines. Veins are nearly flat midvein on both is sides. distinctly Stems leaves alternate, usually single, hairless, unbranched, ridged, 2-4 (60-120 elongated and willow-like. sessile, 3-5" (8-13 cm) long, the lower ones similar to basal leafy leaves, to the the inflorescence. Stem 1" (2.5 cm) wide, Inflorescence a panicle of 16-50 heads, larger than those upper mostly entire. each with 18 bracts and 19-21 purple-blue florets. The parachute of is other attached lettuces, to the spreading seed by a stout but elongated beak HABITAT: Full sun in fertile soil with medium soil moisture. Common in meadows and roadsides in the Great Plains, especially along waterways. Native; adventive further east. (Its ecology is similar to peren- nial sow thistle, with which it is often found.) Comments This is our only lettuce that is a long-lived perennial spreading by rhi- zome. It is one of the more bitter species. Conserva- tion AKA Lactuca totarica. 25 Willow-leaf lettuce Lactuca saligna 1 QUICK CHECK: Short lettuce with long, narrow leaves with arrow-like bases; small yellow heads in spike-like clusters. DESCRIPTION: Winter annual with white latex. Basal leaves and lower stem leaves to 6" (15 cm) long, pin- nately lobed, the lobes long, narrow, and widely spaced, the margins with a few prickle-like teeth. The surface is hairless and the veins flat above and below. Midvein whitish, flat above, the under side protruding and keeled, usually with scattered prickles. Stem to 34" (85 cm) tall and 12 mm thick, single or clumped (branched at the base), erect to strongly lean- ing, hairless, round, with light bloom, the plant tall and columnar when young but often becoming branchy at maturity. Stem leaves held almost vertically or appressed, clasping with two small, pointed lobes at the base; above the base the blades are often narrow, elongated, and entire or nearly so. Uppermost leaves are very small. Inflorescence a panicle with long, spike-like branches, heads small, 8-10 mm across in bloom, usually with less than 18 yellow body. the florets. Seeds have a long thread-like beak about twice as long as the HABITAT: Disturbed, dry, sunny sites with low fertility such as roadsides. vacant lots, pavement cracks, etc. Introduced. Willow lettuce is often too small to bother with, then except the under COMMENTS: better growing conditions where it is robust-and even food quality is mediocre. 375 