BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY
27 Prairie lettuce
Lactuca ludoviciana
2
2
the QUICK heads CHECK: medium-sized Lettuce with brown latex, the leaves with prickly midvains and margins
and yellowish or bluish.
( to ESCRIPTION: 12" (30 cm) long Biennial or perennial. Latex is copious and turns brown
lobed. The veins and tapering, the whole margin erratically prickly-toothed, Lower leaves
curled, coated with and veinlets are flat or nearly so on both sides. The blades sometimes
below. Stem light bloom, hairless. Midvein flat above; whitish, keeled, are wavy or
its 3-7' (1-2.1 m) tall, hollow, not spiny. Compared to other lettuces and prickly
Rare outside the
height. mm) Flower heads fewer and sparser than good or prickly lettuce, but it is stout for
Great Plains and
south central.
beak (15 with long the at parachute blooming, at the the end. 20-50 rays creamy yellow to bluish tinted. larger, The seed to 0.6" has a long, needle-like
HABITAT: in rich soil Prairies and meadows (especially where sloping), roadsides, river floodplains, full
sun with moderate moisture levels, benefitting from recurring small soil disturbances. generally Native. in
x
COMMENTS: This is one of
our best wild lettuces for eat-
ing but it is uncommon in most
regions. At a glance it can be
hard to tell from prickly lettuce
but it is larger, has larger heads
and does not have a spiny stem.
If you have some in your area,
disturb a patch of ground and
spread the seeds. Conserva-
tion 2. AKA western lettuce.
377
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY 27 Prairie lettuce Lactuca ludoviciana 2 2 the QUICK heads CHECK: medium-sized Lettuce with brown latex, the leaves with prickly midvains and margins and yellowish or bluish. ( to ESCRIPTION: 12" (30 cm) long Biennial or perennial. Latex is copious and turns brown lobed. The veins and tapering, the whole margin erratically prickly-toothed, Lower leaves curled, coated with and veinlets are flat or nearly so on both sides. The blades sometimes below. Stem light bloom, hairless. Midvein flat above; whitish, keeled, are wavy or its 3-7' (1-2.1 m) tall, hollow, not spiny. Compared to other lettuces and prickly Rare outside the height. mm) Flower heads fewer and sparser than good or prickly lettuce, but it is stout for Great Plains and south central. beak (15 with long the at parachute blooming, at the the end. 20-50 rays creamy yellow to bluish tinted. larger, The seed to 0.6" has a long, needle-like HABITAT: in rich soil Prairies and meadows (especially where sloping), roadsides, river floodplains, full sun with moderate moisture levels, benefitting from recurring small soil disturbances. generally Native. in x COMMENTS: This is one of our best wild lettuces for eat- ing but it is uncommon in most regions. At a glance it can be hard to tell from prickly lettuce but it is larger, has larger heads and does not have a spiny stem. If you have some in your area, disturb a patch of ground and spread the seeds. Conserva- tion 2. AKA western lettuce. 377 