BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY
2
26 Prickly lettuce Lactuca serriola
CHECK. ( hest high weedy lettlice with spiny leaves that turn to optimize sun-
light numerous annual with white latex. This species has the to pecu- the
QUICI small heads of vellow flowers
DESCRIPTION: Biennial the bases or winter of its leaves to optimize flattened the leaf blades' on a sunny exposure day. Basal
liar habit of twisting look laterally toothed, with
sun, sometimes shallowly making lobed or the unlobed, whole wider plant toward the blunt tip, the margins
reddish leaves spines on the bottom of the midvein and the leaf
margins (longer and denser than those on prairie lettuce
but not as stiff). Stem bloom-coated, hairless, round,
hollow, 3-6' (1-2m) tall, with spines, especially in the upper
part. Stem leaves alternate, clasping, the lobes longer
but still broad. Inflorescence a panicle of numerous
small heads, the heads drooping before opening; florets
yellow. The seed is attached to the parachute by a long
thread-like extension.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Often mistaken for a sow-thistle,
but note the row of soft spines on the bottom of the let-
tuce leaf's midvein.
HABITAT: Disturbed, well-drained soil in sunny loca-
tions: roadsides, vacant lots, gardens, crop fields.
Introduced.
COMMENTS: Believed to be the ancestor of cultivated
lettuce, which gives one an appreciation for how much
we have altered the flavor and form of plants through
domestication. The youngest spring greens of this incred-
ibly common weed are rather mild and are especially
good cooked, but they soon get quite bitter.
376
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, STEM LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP MILKY 2 26 Prickly lettuce Lactuca serriola CHECK. ( hest high weedy lettlice with spiny leaves that turn to optimize sun- light numerous annual with white latex. This species has the to pecu- the QUICI small heads of vellow flowers DESCRIPTION: Biennial the bases or winter of its leaves to optimize flattened the leaf blades' on a sunny exposure day. Basal liar habit of twisting look laterally toothed, with sun, sometimes shallowly making lobed or the unlobed, whole wider plant toward the blunt tip, the margins reddish leaves spines on the bottom of the midvein and the leaf margins (longer and denser than those on prairie lettuce but not as stiff). Stem bloom-coated, hairless, round, hollow, 3-6' (1-2m) tall, with spines, especially in the upper part. Stem leaves alternate, clasping, the lobes longer but still broad. Inflorescence a panicle of numerous small heads, the heads drooping before opening; florets yellow. The seed is attached to the parachute by a long thread-like extension. CONFUSING PLANTS: Often mistaken for a sow-thistle, but note the row of soft spines on the bottom of the let- tuce leaf's midvein. HABITAT: Disturbed, well-drained soil in sunny loca- tions: roadsides, vacant lots, gardens, crop fields. Introduced. COMMENTS: Believed to be the ancestor of cultivated lettuce, which gives one an appreciation for how much we have altered the flavor and form of plants through domestication. The youngest spring greens of this incred- ibly common weed are rather mild and are especially good cooked, but they soon get quite bitter. 376 