BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
GROUP 25 BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
in this lose their basal leaves by the time of flowering. for only A few a fleeting of the
Some plants annual group mustards I placed here have basal leaves and their former
summer-blooming after germination. Their dead remains are sometimes visible, specified
period is indicated by leaf scars. The leaf form referred to in the key, unless leaves are
presence generally refers to the leaves from mid-stem downward. (Upper the
often otherwise, drastically different.) This is the largest group in the book partly because
lobed and divided leaves are lumped together. This was necessary because many
of the plants have highly variable leaf form (even on the same individual).
Thistles will key here if you do not notice the faint milky sap.
Most members of group 25 belong to the mallow family (p. 688) or the
mustard family (p. 682). Most members of both families are edible-and
none are dangerously toxic. Since many of these species are eaten as leafy
greens before the flowers appear, I used leaf features in the key to the extent
possible-but was forced to use flower features toward the end. Because mustard
leaves usually vary dramatically in shape from the top to the bottom of the plant, I
often employ leaf hairiness and vein depression, which are more consistent across
leaf shapes, as distinguishing criteria. This is not trouble-free either: A few
plants toe the line between the categories. If your plant seems on the fence
regarding any feature, check it both ways in the key.
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 25
The key is not your final answer!
or
Leaves spiny on the margin. Thistles (see group 24; these have milky sap, which is easy to miss).
Leaves not spiny; basal leaves entire (only the upper leaves are lobed).
or
1. Scarlet paintbrush
Leaves not spiny; basal leaves toothed, lobed, or divided (upper leaves may not be lobed/divided).
Leaves 3-lobed or ternately divided.
or
Deeply lobed or divided, the terminal division 3-lobed, toothed; stem erect.
2. Sochan
Leaf with 2 small side lobes, otherwise entire; stem prostrate.
Leaves palmately lobed or divided, or with a large palmate terminal division.
3. Poverty weed
Leaves with stipules; sap slimy; basal leaves palmately lobed and always lacking watermarks.
Major veins essentially flat above.
or
Stems limp, rising less than 14" (36 cm); flowers single or in small groups.
Major veins depressed above.
Stems stiff, usually rising more than 24" (60 cm); flowers in a large, loose panicle.
4. Purple poppy-mallow
5. Fringed poppy-mallow
or
Creeping or decumbent, mostly ground-hugging plant, <20" (50 cm) tall.
All or some stems erect, often >20" (50 cm) tall.
6. Common mallow
or
pink Stems to <5' purple, (1.5 m) tall; leaves <5" (13 cm) long; flowers >0.8" (2 cm) wide,
or
Leaves deeply cut; flowers pale pink.
Leaves shallowly lobed; flowers deep pink with purple
7. Musk mallow
Leaves Largest without stipules; sap not slimy; first spring leaves with whitish <13 mm across,
Stems >5' (1.5 m) tall, leaves >8" (20 cm) long, flowers streaks. white.
8. High mallow
9, Glade mallow
borne above watermarks the leaves. more contiguous and clearly follow the main lateral watermarks, veins; flowers bluish,
borne Largest below watermarks the leaves. blotchy, not or only loosely following main lateral veins; flowers
10, Biennial waterleaf
or Leaves divisions. pinnately lobed or divided-the blade usually longer than wide with 4 or more side lobes white,
11. Broad waterleaf
(Continued on next page.)
See key next page.
378
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY GROUP 25 BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY in this lose their basal leaves by the time of flowering. for only A few a fleeting of the Some plants annual group mustards I placed here have basal leaves and their former summer-blooming after germination. Their dead remains are sometimes visible, specified period is indicated by leaf scars. The leaf form referred to in the key, unless leaves are presence generally refers to the leaves from mid-stem downward. (Upper the often otherwise, drastically different.) This is the largest group in the book partly because lobed and divided leaves are lumped together. This was necessary because many of the plants have highly variable leaf form (even on the same individual). Thistles will key here if you do not notice the faint milky sap. Most members of group 25 belong to the mallow family (p. 688) or the mustard family (p. 682). Most members of both families are edible-and none are dangerously toxic. Since many of these species are eaten as leafy greens before the flowers appear, I used leaf features in the key to the extent possible-but was forced to use flower features toward the end. Because mustard leaves usually vary dramatically in shape from the top to the bottom of the plant, I often employ leaf hairiness and vein depression, which are more consistent across leaf shapes, as distinguishing criteria. This is not trouble-free either: A few plants toe the line between the categories. If your plant seems on the fence regarding any feature, check it both ways in the key. TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 25 The key is not your final answer! or Leaves spiny on the margin. Thistles (see group 24; these have milky sap, which is easy to miss). Leaves not spiny; basal leaves entire (only the upper leaves are lobed). or 1. Scarlet paintbrush Leaves not spiny; basal leaves toothed, lobed, or divided (upper leaves may not be lobed/divided). Leaves 3-lobed or ternately divided. or Deeply lobed or divided, the terminal division 3-lobed, toothed; stem erect. 2. Sochan Leaf with 2 small side lobes, otherwise entire; stem prostrate. Leaves palmately lobed or divided, or with a large palmate terminal division. 3. Poverty weed Leaves with stipules; sap slimy; basal leaves palmately lobed and always lacking watermarks. Major veins essentially flat above. or Stems limp, rising less than 14" (36 cm); flowers single or in small groups. Major veins depressed above. Stems stiff, usually rising more than 24" (60 cm); flowers in a large, loose panicle. 4. Purple poppy-mallow 5. Fringed poppy-mallow or Creeping or decumbent, mostly ground-hugging plant, <20" (50 cm) tall. All or some stems erect, often >20" (50 cm) tall. 6. Common mallow or pink Stems to <5' purple, (1.5 m) tall; leaves <5" (13 cm) long; flowers >0.8" (2 cm) wide, or Leaves deeply cut; flowers pale pink. Leaves shallowly lobed; flowers deep pink with purple 7. Musk mallow Leaves Largest without stipules; sap not slimy; first spring leaves with whitish <13 mm across, Stems >5' (1.5 m) tall, leaves >8" (20 cm) long, flowers streaks. white. 8. High mallow 9, Glade mallow borne above watermarks the leaves. more contiguous and clearly follow the main lateral watermarks, veins; flowers bluish, borne Largest below watermarks the leaves. blotchy, not or only loosely following main lateral veins; flowers 10, Biennial waterleaf or Leaves divisions. pinnately lobed or divided-the blade usually longer than wide with 4 or more side lobes white, 11. Broad waterleaf (Continued on next page.) See key next page. 378 