0
1cm
BASAL LEAVESPRESENT,LEAVES LOBED OR DIVIDED,SAP
(Continued from previous page.)
ALTERNATE, NOT MILKY
Leaves or divisions. pinnately lobed or divided-the blade usually longer than wide with 4 or more side lobes
Leaves enormous, oriented vertically, with sinuous, blunt lobes and only these
Leaves Leaves in sets of 3, 2 of which are really enlarged stipules, are lobed.
Not as above. fern-like, densely and evenly lobed, each lobe with rounded all in sub-lobes, plane,
14. Pansy
15. Compass plant
16. Lousewort
Blade Blade surface shallowly hairless; If any hairs present, they are confined to the veins and margins.
Leaf lobed, the lobes erratic and angled toward the leaf major tip.
or
Leaf margin hairless; stem erect with soft hairs and ridged.
Blade deeply lobed or divided, the lobes right-angled to the rachis.
margin hairy; stems spreading with stiff hairs, not ridged.
17. Ox-eye daisy
or
19. Annual wall rocket
Lobes or divisions not ruffled, blunt-pointed with several large, pointed teeth.
or
Lobes closely spaced; erect stem more than 24" (60 cm).
Divisions widely spaced; decumbent stem less than 12" (30 cm).
20, Marsh yellow cress
Lobes or divisions ruffled, rounded, entire or with a few waves or blunt teeth.
21. Creeping yellowcress
2-8 side lobes; much larger terminal lobe is most of the leaf's blade.
14-22 side lobes; large terminal lobe not most of the blade.
22. Wintercress
Blade sparsely to densely hairy across one or both surfaces.
23. Southern wintercress
or
Flowers single from upper leaf axils, with a long, tubular base.
Inflorescence a one-sided panicle, coiled when emerging; flowers with 5 parts.
18. Cut-leaf evening primrose
or
Leaves with 5-7 major lobes.
Leaves with 9-13 major lobes.
12. Virginia waterleaf
Inflorescence a raceme, not coiled or one-sided, flowers with 4 parts.
13. Large waterleaf
or
Flowers blue-purple; only robust basal leaves are lobed (others are lanceolate).
24. Blue mustard
Flowers with tiny (<2 mm) whitish to pink petals, or petais absent.
Pods roughly triangular.
25. Shepherd's purse
or
Pods round to broadly elliptic or slightly heart-shaped.
Stem leaves clasping and appressed.
26. Field pepperweed
Stem leaves not clasping, tapered to the base.
27. Common pepperweed
Flowers with pale creamy to bright yellow petals 3 mm or longer.
Stem smooth and hairless (perhaps a few hairs near the base).
Stem leaves entire, appressed; veins flat and obscure.
or
28. Tower mustard
Stem leaves not appressed, mostly lobed and ruffled: veinlets depressed.
29. Field mustard
Stem with scattered to dense hairs (upper parts sometimes nearly hairless).
Pods nearly spherical.
Upper stem smooth; pedicels appressed.
30. Bastard cabbage
or
Upper stem bumpy: pedicels ascending.
31. Hill mustard
Pods elongated, appressed to the rachis or nearly so.
5-8' (1.5-2.5 m) tall; upper leaves narrowly elliptic and toothed:
uppermost leaves drooping and entire.
32. Black mustard
or
2-5' (60-150 cm) tall; upper leaves lobed; uppermost toothed, not drooping.
34. Hedge mustard
1-3' (30-90 cm) tall; uppermost leaves unlobed, toothed.
39. Charlock mustard
Pods elongated, not appressed to the rachis.
Upper leaves with thread-like lobes.
36. Tumble mustard
or
Upper leaves with pointed side lobes at least 3 times as long as wide.
Lobes broad at the base, tapered to a point.
35. Tall hedge mustard
or
Lobes linear or slightly narrowed at the base, broadest in the middle,
37. Highway mustard
the tips abruptly pointed.
Upper leaves with blunt side lobes less than 3 times as long as wide.
38. French rocket
Raceme with a lobed bract at the base of each pedicel.
or
33. White mustard
Pods with a halo of white hairs near the base.
Upper leaves toothed but without side lobes.
Pod slightly bulged around seeds, nearly appressed, 3 mm thick or less.
39. Charlock mustard
40. Wild radish
Pod distinctly bulged, 3-6 mm thick: long-tapered beak.
379
0 1cm BASAL LEAVESPRESENT,LEAVES LOBED OR DIVIDED,SAP (Continued from previous page.) ALTERNATE, NOT MILKY Leaves or divisions. pinnately lobed or divided-the blade usually longer than wide with 4 or more side lobes Leaves enormous, oriented vertically, with sinuous, blunt lobes and only these Leaves Leaves in sets of 3, 2 of which are really enlarged stipules, are lobed. Not as above. fern-like, densely and evenly lobed, each lobe with rounded all in sub-lobes, plane, 14. Pansy 15. Compass plant 16. Lousewort Blade Blade surface shallowly hairless; If any hairs present, they are confined to the veins and margins. Leaf lobed, the lobes erratic and angled toward the leaf major tip. or Leaf margin hairless; stem erect with soft hairs and ridged. Blade deeply lobed or divided, the lobes right-angled to the rachis. margin hairy; stems spreading with stiff hairs, not ridged. 17. Ox-eye daisy or 19. Annual wall rocket Lobes or divisions not ruffled, blunt-pointed with several large, pointed teeth. or Lobes closely spaced; erect stem more than 24" (60 cm). Divisions widely spaced; decumbent stem less than 12" (30 cm). 20, Marsh yellow cress Lobes or divisions ruffled, rounded, entire or with a few waves or blunt teeth. 21. Creeping yellowcress 2-8 side lobes; much larger terminal lobe is most of the leaf's blade. 14-22 side lobes; large terminal lobe not most of the blade. 22. Wintercress Blade sparsely to densely hairy across one or both surfaces. 23. Southern wintercress or Flowers single from upper leaf axils, with a long, tubular base. Inflorescence a one-sided panicle, coiled when emerging; flowers with 5 parts. 18. Cut-leaf evening primrose or Leaves with 5-7 major lobes. Leaves with 9-13 major lobes. 12. Virginia waterleaf Inflorescence a raceme, not coiled or one-sided, flowers with 4 parts. 13. Large waterleaf or Flowers blue-purple; only robust basal leaves are lobed (others are lanceolate). 24. Blue mustard Flowers with tiny (<2 mm) whitish to pink petals, or petais absent. Pods roughly triangular. 25. Shepherd's purse or Pods round to broadly elliptic or slightly heart-shaped. Stem leaves clasping and appressed. 26. Field pepperweed Stem leaves not clasping, tapered to the base. 27. Common pepperweed Flowers with pale creamy to bright yellow petals 3 mm or longer. Stem smooth and hairless (perhaps a few hairs near the base). Stem leaves entire, appressed; veins flat and obscure. or 28. Tower mustard Stem leaves not appressed, mostly lobed and ruffled: veinlets depressed. 29. Field mustard Stem with scattered to dense hairs (upper parts sometimes nearly hairless). Pods nearly spherical. Upper stem smooth; pedicels appressed. 30. Bastard cabbage or Upper stem bumpy: pedicels ascending. 31. Hill mustard Pods elongated, appressed to the rachis or nearly so. 5-8' (1.5-2.5 m) tall; upper leaves narrowly elliptic and toothed: uppermost leaves drooping and entire. 32. Black mustard or 2-5' (60-150 cm) tall; upper leaves lobed; uppermost toothed, not drooping. 34. Hedge mustard 1-3' (30-90 cm) tall; uppermost leaves unlobed, toothed. 39. Charlock mustard Pods elongated, not appressed to the rachis. Upper leaves with thread-like lobes. 36. Tumble mustard or Upper leaves with pointed side lobes at least 3 times as long as wide. Lobes broad at the base, tapered to a point. 35. Tall hedge mustard or Lobes linear or slightly narrowed at the base, broadest in the middle, 37. Highway mustard the tips abruptly pointed. Upper leaves with blunt side lobes less than 3 times as long as wide. 38. French rocket Raceme with a lobed bract at the base of each pedicel. or 33. White mustard Pods with a halo of white hairs near the base. Upper leaves toothed but without side lobes. Pod slightly bulged around seeds, nearly appressed, 3 mm thick or less. 39. Charlock mustard 40. Wild radish Pod distinctly bulged, 3-6 mm thick: long-tapered beak. 379 