mily Orobanchocede
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
branching upward they only become in the inflorescence. Stem leaves alternate, the lower ones with long,
too
leaves of the inflorescence progressively smaller, and the petioles shorter Uppermost leaves narrow, are pointed lober
branches in are entire or merely toothed. Inflorescence loose with sessile Reduced
subtended terminating about solitary heads atop long, vertical, grooved pedicels Flowerheads many (mid long. aso ending
by button a dozen ovate-lanceolate, entire bracts about 0 6" (15 mm) long. The head to late consists summer, of 1
Stem
y ow-green or tall mound of disk florets in the center, surrounded by 6-16 drooping yellow rays 5-1'
(4-5 cm) long. Seeds like miniature sunflower seeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Bristly buttercup Ranunculus hispidus often grows in the same areas and is mildly
toxic. This and most other buttercups have petioles with a small channel and a hollow center, leaf sheaths
with papery margins, and secondary veins that are deeply depressed and not offset by color
HABITAT: Rich, moist soil in partial shade to full sun. Most commonly in floodplains, valleys, shrub swamps,
forest margins. Native.
FOOD USE: The young leaves can be eaten raw or cooked. In late spring or early summer, the shoots can
be peeled and eaten raw or cooked. New tender leaves occasionally appear throughout the growing season,
especially after mowing. Sochan greens are traditionally fried in pork fat. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This vegetable has a somewhat aromatic, faintly resinous flavor reminiscent of goldenrods and
asters. "Sochan" is a Cherokee name. The plant does not have a generally accepted common name in English.
despite the fact that it is among the most common and widespread plants on our continent and has been eater
for thousands of years. AKA tall coneflower, green-headed coneflower, cut-leaf coneflower, golden glow
(top left) Shoots
at the stage for
peeling
(top right) Early
spring leaves.
(bottom) New
flush of leaves
in late summer
broader and
blunter than the
spring leaves.
mily Orobanchocede BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY branching upward they only become in the inflorescence. Stem leaves alternate, the lower ones with long, too leaves of the inflorescence progressively smaller, and the petioles shorter Uppermost leaves narrow, are pointed lober branches in are entire or merely toothed. Inflorescence loose with sessile Reduced subtended terminating about solitary heads atop long, vertical, grooved pedicels Flowerheads many (mid long. aso ending by button a dozen ovate-lanceolate, entire bracts about 0 6" (15 mm) long. The head to late consists summer, of 1 Stem y ow-green or tall mound of disk florets in the center, surrounded by 6-16 drooping yellow rays 5-1' (4-5 cm) long. Seeds like miniature sunflower seeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: Bristly buttercup Ranunculus hispidus often grows in the same areas and is mildly toxic. This and most other buttercups have petioles with a small channel and a hollow center, leaf sheaths with papery margins, and secondary veins that are deeply depressed and not offset by color HABITAT: Rich, moist soil in partial shade to full sun. Most commonly in floodplains, valleys, shrub swamps, forest margins. Native. FOOD USE: The young leaves can be eaten raw or cooked. In late spring or early summer, the shoots can be peeled and eaten raw or cooked. New tender leaves occasionally appear throughout the growing season, especially after mowing. Sochan greens are traditionally fried in pork fat. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This vegetable has a somewhat aromatic, faintly resinous flavor reminiscent of goldenrods and asters. "Sochan" is a Cherokee name. The plant does not have a generally accepted common name in English. despite the fact that it is among the most common and widespread plants on our continent and has been eater for thousands of years. AKA tall coneflower, green-headed coneflower, cut-leaf coneflower, golden glow (top left) Shoots at the stage for peeling (top right) Early spring leaves. (bottom) New flush of leaves in late summer broader and blunter than the spring leaves. 