LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE,
BASAL LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT
Scarlet Castilleja coccinea family Orobanchaceae
paintbrush
2
822
1
QUICK and pointed, CHECK: upper leaves with three lobes. ID
Shin-high herb with leaning scarlet difficulty tops 1. in spring; lower leaves clasping, linear 1-2"
small
and
DESCRIPTION: cm) long, narrowly Biennial or elliptic, winter abruptly annual. Basal pointed, thick, leaves folded purple in a along rosette, with the fine midvein. darker purple Stems ridges, single cm),
or (2.5-5 clustered, 8-24" hairy, (20-60 erect, unbranched. tall and 2-4 Stem mm leaves entire, alternate, but clasping, upper leaves 2-3" have (5-8 one or
hollow, almost linear, densely the lobes tops on often each curled. side. Small Lower leaves leaves are are tucked depressed into the axils. above Blades and protruding have one prominent below. Both parallel it. sides The
vein two densely long, on each pointed side covered of the with midvein-all long hairs. three Flowers of these in strongly packed those terminal below spikes, upper flowers each with have a scarlet bract tips, beneath as does the
bracts are of lower flowers resemble the corolla, the anthers, regular leaves, and pistil but scarcely protrude. protrude. The corolla tube is almost colorless
and 2-lobed has tube an opening from which near the middle from which 3 small claw-like appendages
HABITAT: Sunny, disturbed soil, often on
slopes. Native.
FOOD USE: The tender tops, including
the flowers, can be eaten raw or cooked.
Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This species is partially
parasitic and has a mild and slightly sweet
version of the "parasitic plant flavor."
RELATED EDIBLE: In Texas, Oklahoma,
and Louisiana this species is replaced
by the equally edible C. indivisa, which is
similar but has unlobed upper leaves (so
it would key into group 22).
WARNING: These parasitic plants are
suspected of absorbing toxins from host
plants and should not be eaten when grow-
ing beside poisonous species.
2
Sochan
2
2
E
IWE-346
Rudbeckia laciniata Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK CHECK: Tall plant with large, deeply cut leaves with 3 main lobes or divisions,
subllower like flowers with a bulging center, and drooping yellow rays. ID difficulty 3.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial herb from short rhizomes with many crowns. Hairiness is vari-
able bet ween individuals. Basal leaves single or in rosettes, to 13" (33 cm) long, with main
fully) divisions, cut fully or almost fully separated, the middle division again deeply (occasionally 3
again. carly spring leaves start out purple; these and fall leaves tend
blunter, narrower, shallower deeper lobes. A new flush may appear in late summer after flowering; to these have
older leaves. Underside lobes and has a smoother texture. Upper surface has short, erect hairs, which have fewer, broade
claw tipped teeth. Major veins longer nearly hairs flat on the major veins. Margins have irregular, large, acute become stiff on
section usually etched above light green on new (sometimes leaves but maroon, less 50 as especially they above expand. and in the protruding Petioles 80-120% below, offset of blade by yellowish length, ascending color. Veinlets to to obtuse, erect, are
erect, the penole a 8 blunt base bottomed becomes V broadly with 2 small channeled grooves and on sheath-like the outside channel), and a hairless deep, narrow or with channel erect with hairs, winged solid, the margins. cross
380 111) tall, 0.8" (8-20 mm) thick, solid, smooth, but remains lightly fleshy bloom-coated, (not papery), somewhat Stems multiple, angular,
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE, BASAL LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT Scarlet Castilleja coccinea family Orobanchaceae paintbrush 2 822 1 QUICK and pointed, CHECK: upper leaves with three lobes. ID Shin-high herb with leaning scarlet difficulty tops 1. in spring; lower leaves clasping, linear 1-2" small and DESCRIPTION: cm) long, narrowly Biennial or elliptic, winter abruptly annual. Basal pointed, thick, leaves folded purple in a along rosette, with the fine midvein. darker purple Stems ridges, single cm), or (2.5-5 clustered, 8-24" hairy, (20-60 erect, unbranched. tall and 2-4 Stem mm leaves entire, alternate, but clasping, upper leaves 2-3" have (5-8 one or hollow, almost linear, densely the lobes tops on often each curled. side. Small Lower leaves leaves are are tucked depressed into the axils. above Blades and protruding have one prominent below. Both parallel it. sides The vein two densely long, on each pointed side covered of the with midvein-all long hairs. three Flowers of these in strongly packed those terminal below spikes, upper flowers each with have a scarlet bract tips, beneath as does the bracts are of lower flowers resemble the corolla, the anthers, regular leaves, and pistil but scarcely protrude. protrude. The corolla tube is almost colorless and 2-lobed has tube an opening from which near the middle from which 3 small claw-like appendages HABITAT: Sunny, disturbed soil, often on slopes. Native. FOOD USE: The tender tops, including the flowers, can be eaten raw or cooked. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This species is partially parasitic and has a mild and slightly sweet version of the "parasitic plant flavor." RELATED EDIBLE: In Texas, Oklahoma, and Louisiana this species is replaced by the equally edible C. indivisa, which is similar but has unlobed upper leaves (so it would key into group 22). WARNING: These parasitic plants are suspected of absorbing toxins from host plants and should not be eaten when grow- ing beside poisonous species. 2 Sochan 2 2 E IWE-346 Rudbeckia laciniata Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK CHECK: Tall plant with large, deeply cut leaves with 3 main lobes or divisions, subllower like flowers with a bulging center, and drooping yellow rays. ID difficulty 3. DESCRIPTION: Perennial herb from short rhizomes with many crowns. Hairiness is vari- able bet ween individuals. Basal leaves single or in rosettes, to 13" (33 cm) long, with main fully) divisions, cut fully or almost fully separated, the middle division again deeply (occasionally 3 again. carly spring leaves start out purple; these and fall leaves tend blunter, narrower, shallower deeper lobes. A new flush may appear in late summer after flowering; to these have older leaves. Underside lobes and has a smoother texture. Upper surface has short, erect hairs, which have fewer, broade claw tipped teeth. Major veins longer nearly hairs flat on the major veins. Margins have irregular, large, acute become stiff on section usually etched above light green on new (sometimes leaves but maroon, less 50 as especially they above expand. and in the protruding Petioles 80-120% below, offset of blade by yellowish length, ascending color. Veinlets to to obtuse, erect, are erect, the penole a 8 blunt base bottomed becomes V broadly with 2 small channeled grooves and on sheath-like the outside channel), and a hairless deep, narrow or with channel erect with hairs, winged solid, the margins. cross 380 111) tall, 0.8" (8-20 mm) thick, solid, smooth, but remains lightly fleshy bloom-coated, (not papery), somewhat Stems multiple, angular, 