LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE,
BASAL LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT
3 Monolepis Povertyweed nuttalliana - 2 family Amaranthaceae
plant with semi-succulent leaves, difficulty lobed at the 1. base
with an elongated annual, rosettes present spring the but base later
QUICK CHECK: Small toothless sprawling tip; tiny, unshowy flowers and fruits. ID in
DESCRIPTION: Weedy annual or winter lower stem leaves. Stems multiple from sometimes
withering; rosette widely leaves at the similar base), to spreading to decumbent or with ascending, gentle troughs, solid,
semi-succulent, branching (or branching above, the to 12" surface (30 cm) slightly long and mealy 4 mm with thick, scattered, roundish long-tapered short, glandular to the hairs. tip, which Stem is leaves usually alternate, abruptly
pointed, 0.7-2" (1.8-5 often cm) with long, a downcurved narrow, tapering claw. Blades at the are base thick, spreading, and semi-succulent, pointed, triangular and hairless lobes with in two the (occasionally lower third;
otherwise 4) they are entire. Surfaces hairless but minutely
granular. Midvein depressed; the only evident secondary
veins are faint and run to the lobe tips. Petioles 70-90% of
the blade length on lower leaves; upper leaves are reduced
in size, on much shorter petioles. Flowers tiny and unshowy,
sessile, borne in small, tight clusters in the upper leaf axils,
accompanied by several linear, often curved, fleshy bracts.
Fruit a tiny, plump disk containing one seed.
HABITAT: Disturbed and compacted soil with high salt con-
tent, moist more often than dry, in full sun. Roadsides, crop
fields, floodplains, waste areas. Native.
FOOD USE: Young, tender stems and leaves can be eaten
raw or cooked. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Like miniature succulent lambsquarters with
dirt on it. Luckily, dirt can be washed off the hairless leaves.
4 Purple poppy mallow
2
1
1
Callirhoe involucrata
IWE-300
Malvaceae (Mallow family)
Showy QUICK purple CHECK: petal Low, flowers trailing, multi-stemmed, hairy herb with palmately lobed leaves;
DESCRIPTION: on long, erect pedicels. ID difficulty 2.
sides 51 long to (33 smaller the mm) and but crown about denser thick lobes and and as toward below, short-tapered wide, Low /" (18 perennial palmately the the cm) hairs tip long, below otherwise pointing herb not lobed branching, spreading to with a distally. toothless. narrow 3-5 thickest primary only Veins laproot. Lobe by in palmate; lobes, seed. tips the Basal middle, are cut Enlarged leaves the mostly deeply major narrowed 1-3" taproot or blunt. shallowly, (2.5-8 abruptly Surfaces to cm) 1.3" with finely a few hairy large on teeth both
382
veins
and
veinlets
flat
to
faintly
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE, BASAL LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT 3 Monolepis Povertyweed nuttalliana - 2 family Amaranthaceae plant with semi-succulent leaves, difficulty lobed at the 1. base with an elongated annual, rosettes present spring the but base later QUICK CHECK: Small toothless sprawling tip; tiny, unshowy flowers and fruits. ID in DESCRIPTION: Weedy annual or winter lower stem leaves. Stems multiple from sometimes withering; rosette widely leaves at the similar base), to spreading to decumbent or with ascending, gentle troughs, solid, semi-succulent, branching (or branching above, the to 12" surface (30 cm) slightly long and mealy 4 mm with thick, scattered, roundish long-tapered short, glandular to the hairs. tip, which Stem is leaves usually alternate, abruptly pointed, 0.7-2" (1.8-5 often cm) with long, a downcurved narrow, tapering claw. Blades at the are base thick, spreading, and semi-succulent, pointed, triangular and hairless lobes with in two the (occasionally lower third; otherwise 4) they are entire. Surfaces hairless but minutely granular. Midvein depressed; the only evident secondary veins are faint and run to the lobe tips. Petioles 70-90% of the blade length on lower leaves; upper leaves are reduced in size, on much shorter petioles. Flowers tiny and unshowy, sessile, borne in small, tight clusters in the upper leaf axils, accompanied by several linear, often curved, fleshy bracts. Fruit a tiny, plump disk containing one seed. HABITAT: Disturbed and compacted soil with high salt con- tent, moist more often than dry, in full sun. Roadsides, crop fields, floodplains, waste areas. Native. FOOD USE: Young, tender stems and leaves can be eaten raw or cooked. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Like miniature succulent lambsquarters with dirt on it. Luckily, dirt can be washed off the hairless leaves. 4 Purple poppy mallow 2 1 1 Callirhoe involucrata IWE-300 Malvaceae (Mallow family) Showy QUICK purple CHECK: petal Low, flowers trailing, multi-stemmed, hairy herb with palmately lobed leaves; DESCRIPTION: on long, erect pedicels. ID difficulty 2. sides 51 long to (33 smaller the mm) and but crown about denser thick lobes and and as toward below, short-tapered wide, Low /" (18 perennial palmately the the cm) hairs tip long, below otherwise pointing herb not lobed branching, spreading to with a distally. toothless. narrow 3-5 thickest primary only Veins laproot. Lobe by in palmate; lobes, seed. tips the Basal middle, are cut Enlarged leaves the mostly deeply major narrowed 1-3" taproot or blunt. shallowly, (2.5-8 abruptly Surfaces to cm) 1.3" with finely a few hairy large on teeth both 382 veins and veinlets flat to faintly 