ily
BABAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
etched ground above. hugging Petioles hairy, not (or faintly) channeled, 3-4 times
with scattered long at first but the tips later decumbent, to 30" (75 cm) the blade long length items multiple preading,
Stem leaves alternate, hairs. similar Flowering to stems die back in early to mid summer; and new rising rosettes about 12" 30 ml stall
Stems
petioles, with clasping basal but with narrower and more pointed lobes, appear aut
5 gle flower atop a stipules about 13 mm long and equally wide, with sharp ar uminate on progressively charter
hairy, lanceolate long, erect, halry, pedicel up to 8" (20 cm) long, rising above tips Inflorescence
5 narrow, sepal-like bracts. sepals about 0.7" (18 mm) long, fused at the base; immediately the below leaves. these Flowers have
that Corollas 2-3" (5-8 cm) across, cup-shaped. showy. with are long.
stamens are overlapped but not fused at the whitish base and wider toward the wavy tip. The 5 cose central to purple column petals and
are whitish. Fruits flattened, wheel-like, 1 cm wide, composed of 14-20 sections
CONFUSING PLANTS: Buttercups may have similar leaves but the petioles are thicker, the flowers
different, and the roots fibrous. Prairie larkspur Delphinium carolinianum leaves have longer, narrower are lobes lery
HABITAT: Native. Dry, open areas: prairies, roadsides, lightly used pastures, meadows-especially where sandy
FOOD USE: Roots are best from late summer through early spring when the plant is fully or partially dor
mant. They are eaten cooked as a vegetable. Young leaves can be eaten raw or cooked, or used as a soup
thickener. The flowers make an attractive garnish. Immature fruits can be eaten like those of common mal-
low. Conservation 3/1.
COMMENTS: This is one of the most practical root vegetables native to North America. It IS large, tastes
good, and is easy to harvest, clean, and store. All of the edible parts are mucilaginous, as is character stic of
the mallow family. The common name is sort of silly, because most species of poppy-mallow have flowers
about the same color. The members of this genus depend on soil disturbance for propagation, and a forager
can increase their abundance by spreading seeds into small excavations. AKA winecup, prairie winecup.
RELATED EDIBLES: Other poppy-mallows have edible roots, fruits, flowers, and leaves, but I have not tried
all the species. Some are rare and protected.
ily BABAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY etched ground above. hugging Petioles hairy, not (or faintly) channeled, 3-4 times with scattered long at first but the tips later decumbent, to 30" (75 cm) the blade long length items multiple preading, Stem leaves alternate, hairs. similar Flowering to stems die back in early to mid summer; and new rising rosettes about 12" 30 ml stall Stems petioles, with clasping basal but with narrower and more pointed lobes, appear aut 5 gle flower atop a stipules about 13 mm long and equally wide, with sharp ar uminate on progressively charter hairy, lanceolate long, erect, halry, pedicel up to 8" (20 cm) long, rising above tips Inflorescence 5 narrow, sepal-like bracts. sepals about 0.7" (18 mm) long, fused at the base; immediately the below leaves. these Flowers have that Corollas 2-3" (5-8 cm) across, cup-shaped. showy. with are long. stamens are overlapped but not fused at the whitish base and wider toward the wavy tip. The 5 cose central to purple column petals and are whitish. Fruits flattened, wheel-like, 1 cm wide, composed of 14-20 sections CONFUSING PLANTS: Buttercups may have similar leaves but the petioles are thicker, the flowers different, and the roots fibrous. Prairie larkspur Delphinium carolinianum leaves have longer, narrower are lobes lery HABITAT: Native. Dry, open areas: prairies, roadsides, lightly used pastures, meadows-especially where sandy FOOD USE: Roots are best from late summer through early spring when the plant is fully or partially dor mant. They are eaten cooked as a vegetable. Young leaves can be eaten raw or cooked, or used as a soup thickener. The flowers make an attractive garnish. Immature fruits can be eaten like those of common mal- low. Conservation 3/1. COMMENTS: This is one of the most practical root vegetables native to North America. It IS large, tastes good, and is easy to harvest, clean, and store. All of the edible parts are mucilaginous, as is character stic of the mallow family. The common name is sort of silly, because most species of poppy-mallow have flowers about the same color. The members of this genus depend on soil disturbance for propagation, and a forager can increase their abundance by spreading seeds into small excavations. AKA winecup, prairie winecup. RELATED EDIBLES: Other poppy-mallows have edible roots, fruits, flowers, and leaves, but I have not tried all the species. Some are rare and protected. 