Malvacese (Mallow fam
BASAL LEAVES LOBED PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
6 Common mallow
1
2
Malva neglecta Malvaceae (Mallow family)
tosa am
leaves; a flattened "wheel" divided into sections. ID difficulty 1.
JICK fruit CHECK: Creeping herb with very long petioles and shallowly labed
DESCRIPTION: times absent, Weedy annual to short-lived perennial. Sap slimy, Basal
Leaves are roundish especially on smaller plants-and rosettes without stems are leaves some-
Blades ruffled, in outline with a cutout at the base, the lobes usually not rarely seen.
the 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) across, with 5-7 shallow lobes, sparsely overlapped.
on sides, top and margins with blunt teeth. Veins palmate, all major veins running hairy straight on both to
faintly channeled, protruding below. Petioles 1.5-4 times the blade length, 1.5-2.5 mm thick, lobe tips, depressed
infloressence
erect), to 28" hairy. Stems multiple on larger plants, leaning or decumbent to prostrate one side flattened to
or (70 cm) long and 7 mm thick, branched occasionally (including near the base), (rarely solid, weakly
otherwise green, finely pubescent, roundish to slightly angled. Stem leaves alternate with small triangular purplish
like the basal leaves. Inflorescence axillary tufts of 1-4 flowers on pedicels 0.5-1.5" (1-4 mm) stipules
Flowers (April-October) 9-15 mm across with 5 broad, sharp, triangular sepals. Petals 5, with broad. notched lang.
tips, white with light purplish veins. Fruit flattened and wheel-like, green turning brown, consisting of 12-15
"pie-slice" carpels around a circular middle, with 5 calyx lobes wrapped around it.
HABITAT: Introduced. Moist soil in full sun to light shade. Likes yard edges, gardens, building foundations, weedy areas.
FOOD USE: Gather young leaves and tender stem tips from late spring through summer; they are edible raw
but better as a potherb or soup thickener. Immature fruits, called cheeses, can be cooked as a vegetable.
COMMENTS: Mallow cheeses are unique in appearance with an excellent, mild flavor. It's too bad that it
takes 50 long to collect a cupful.
RELATED EDIBLE: M. pusilla is nearly identical, though slightly smaller, and is used in the same ways.
385
Malvacese (Mallow fam BASAL LEAVES LOBED PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY 6 Common mallow 1 2 Malva neglecta Malvaceae (Mallow family) tosa am leaves; a flattened "wheel" divided into sections. ID difficulty 1. JICK fruit CHECK: Creeping herb with very long petioles and shallowly labed DESCRIPTION: times absent, Weedy annual to short-lived perennial. Sap slimy, Basal Leaves are roundish especially on smaller plants-and rosettes without stems are leaves some- Blades ruffled, in outline with a cutout at the base, the lobes usually not rarely seen. the 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) across, with 5-7 shallow lobes, sparsely overlapped. on sides, top and margins with blunt teeth. Veins palmate, all major veins running hairy straight on both to faintly channeled, protruding below. Petioles 1.5-4 times the blade length, 1.5-2.5 mm thick, lobe tips, depressed infloressence erect), to 28" hairy. Stems multiple on larger plants, leaning or decumbent to prostrate one side flattened to or (70 cm) long and 7 mm thick, branched occasionally (including near the base), (rarely solid, weakly otherwise green, finely pubescent, roundish to slightly angled. Stem leaves alternate with small triangular purplish like the basal leaves. Inflorescence axillary tufts of 1-4 flowers on pedicels 0.5-1.5" (1-4 mm) stipules Flowers (April-October) 9-15 mm across with 5 broad, sharp, triangular sepals. Petals 5, with broad. notched lang. tips, white with light purplish veins. Fruit flattened and wheel-like, green turning brown, consisting of 12-15 "pie-slice" carpels around a circular middle, with 5 calyx lobes wrapped around it. HABITAT: Introduced. Moist soil in full sun to light shade. Likes yard edges, gardens, building foundations, weedy areas. FOOD USE: Gather young leaves and tender stem tips from late spring through summer; they are edible raw but better as a potherb or soup thickener. Immature fruits, called cheeses, can be cooked as a vegetable. COMMENTS: Mallow cheeses are unique in appearance with an excellent, mild flavor. It's too bad that it takes 50 long to collect a cupful. RELATED EDIBLE: M. pusilla is nearly identical, though slightly smaller, and is used in the same ways. 385 