LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
2
2
2
#2
5 Fringed poppy mallow
Callirhoe pedata Malvaceae (Mallow family)
plant with a loose, spreading cluster of bright pink-purple difficulty 2.
flowers QUICK on CHECK: long pedicels, Knee-high held well above the palmately compound leaves. ID
Perennial from taproot with a medium-sized, turnip-shaped 2-4" enlargement (5-10 cm)
DESCRIPTION: light-colored skin, a and slightly fibrous flesh. Basal leaves times the blade
long, deeply sheath-like base and a wing toward the
and thin, smooth, palmately lobed with the lobes long and narrow. Petioles 2-4 distal end. The
length, with a whitish, hairless winged, above but slightly hairy below. Stems one to several, erect or spreading delicate and then but
blades are mostly reaching 30" (75 cm) tall and 3-6 mm thick, thin for their height, appearing smooth above,
sweeping rather upward, stiff, the upper portion leafless, round, sometimes furrowed near the base confined but to the lower
actually hairless but sometimes stiff-hairy, coated gray-green. Stem leaves alternate, the to
stem, usually deeply cut with very narrow, almost lacy lobes. Inflorescence usually a loose raceme, pedicels to
6" (15 cm) long, thin, almost hairless, ascending. Flowers (mostly spring) have a calyx of 5 triangular ovate,
acuminate lobes, fused near the base, with 3-5 keel or wrinkle-like veins protruding on the outside. Petals purple
(rarely pink or white) with a minute fringe at their tips. The column is whitish. Fruits small, wheel-like, com-
posed of many sections.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Prairie larkspur Delphinium carolinianum has hairier leaves with depressed veins.
HABITAT: Shortgrass or mixed prairies, especially where rocky. Native.
FOOD USE: The small thickened root is excellent when cooked. Young leaves, shoots, and flower buds are
all better than those of purple poppy-mallow. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: If I lived in Oklahoma or North Texas I'd be sure to have this elegant wildflower growing all
around my property. This species is sometimes considered a smaller southern form of C. digitata, a plant of
tallgrass prairies just to the north. C. digitata is the tallest and showiest species in this genus, and ethnography
suggests that it may have had the most preferred root for eating, but it is rare and should not be collected
from wild populations.
384
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, 2 2 2 #2 5 Fringed poppy mallow Callirhoe pedata Malvaceae (Mallow family) plant with a loose, spreading cluster of bright pink-purple difficulty 2. flowers QUICK on CHECK: long pedicels, Knee-high held well above the palmately compound leaves. ID Perennial from taproot with a medium-sized, turnip-shaped 2-4" enlargement (5-10 cm) DESCRIPTION: light-colored skin, a and slightly fibrous flesh. Basal leaves times the blade long, deeply sheath-like base and a wing toward the and thin, smooth, palmately lobed with the lobes long and narrow. Petioles 2-4 distal end. The length, with a whitish, hairless winged, above but slightly hairy below. Stems one to several, erect or spreading delicate and then but blades are mostly reaching 30" (75 cm) tall and 3-6 mm thick, thin for their height, appearing smooth above, sweeping rather upward, stiff, the upper portion leafless, round, sometimes furrowed near the base confined but to the lower actually hairless but sometimes stiff-hairy, coated gray-green. Stem leaves alternate, the to stem, usually deeply cut with very narrow, almost lacy lobes. Inflorescence usually a loose raceme, pedicels to 6" (15 cm) long, thin, almost hairless, ascending. Flowers (mostly spring) have a calyx of 5 triangular ovate, acuminate lobes, fused near the base, with 3-5 keel or wrinkle-like veins protruding on the outside. Petals purple (rarely pink or white) with a minute fringe at their tips. The column is whitish. Fruits small, wheel-like, com- posed of many sections. CONFUSING PLANTS: Prairie larkspur Delphinium carolinianum has hairier leaves with depressed veins. HABITAT: Shortgrass or mixed prairies, especially where rocky. Native. FOOD USE: The small thickened root is excellent when cooked. Young leaves, shoots, and flower buds are all better than those of purple poppy-mallow. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: If I lived in Oklahoma or North Texas I'd be sure to have this elegant wildflower growing all around my property. This species is sometimes considered a smaller southern form of C. digitata, a plant of tallgrass prairies just to the north. C. digitata is the tallest and showiest species in this genus, and ethnography suggests that it may have had the most preferred root for eating, but it is rare and should not be collected from wild populations. 384 