mm
0
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
8
High mallow
2
2
2
2
Malva sylvestris
Malvaceae (Mallow family)
and erect, flowers pinkish with purple highlights. ID difficulty 1.
ICK often CHECK: Leaves palmate with blunt lobes and long petioles, stems almost smanto
DESCRIPTION: rounded Biennial from a taproot. Rosette leaves numerous. 1-4' (2.5-10
nearly to kidney-shaped with 3-7 blunt, shallow lobes; often slightly ruffled. cm) long,
is usually a deep maroon area where the petiole attaches. The surface is hairless or There
and rather glossy above, usually with sparse and tiny hairs below. Veins and veinlets nearly so
depressed above and protrude below. Margins have blunt or wavy teeth. Petioles several are
Rare in mapped
times blade length, rounded below and flat to faintly channeled above, often with a narrow
area. Occasional
line of hairs running along the top. Stems 1.5-5' (45-150 cm) tall, usually clumped, mostly
e'sewhere.
erect (especially in competition) but may be leaning or decumbent without competition, solid, roundish but
faintly angled, branched (but not at the base, and the branches of erect stems remain short). The surface is
hairless to sparsely hairy, occasionally roughened. Stem leaves 2-6" (5-15 cm) long, alternate, more deeply
lobed than basal leaves, with sharper teeth and lobes, the blades more
ruffled, and the petioles shorter. Stipules linear to triangular, 4-9 mm
Inflorescence axillary clusters of 3-22 on pedicels and peduncles ranging
from almost sessile to 2" (5 cm) long. Flower (summer and fall) 0.9-1.9"
(23-48 mm) across with 3 elliptic to lanceolate bracts just behind the
calyx of 5 broadly triangular sepals. Petals 5, longer than wide, widest at
the tip with a rounded notch like a fishtail; long and narrow proximally with
dense, short hairs near the base, pink to pale purple with darker streaks along
the veins. The column is pink-purple but the anthers white. Fruit wheel-
shaped, 7-10 mm wide and 3 mm thick, pale green at first drying to brown.
composed of 10-12 parts (carpels), the back roughened by raised veins.
The calyx persists and wraps around the fruit.
HABITAT: Weedy edges of yards and parks, disturbed forests.
Introduced.
FOOD USE: The greens can be eaten raw or cooked almost all growing
season, but are best when new and tender in spring and early summer.
Older leaves can still be used as a soup thickener. Flowers and buds are
edible, the former making a pretty garnish. Immature fruits,
while still green, make a fun nibble or vegetable.
COMMENTS: This species is common and well-known in
Europe. In North America it is often grown in flower gardens
but only rarely does it escape and persist. Young plants,
especially when growing along the ground, look much like
common mallow M. neglecta-but once they stand up or
flower the differences become obvious. Since it is cultivated
the genetics are especially diverse, making the form also and
size highly variable. Adding confusion, this species is
often called "common mallow."
mm 0 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY 8 High mallow 2 2 2 2 Malva sylvestris Malvaceae (Mallow family) and erect, flowers pinkish with purple highlights. ID difficulty 1. ICK often CHECK: Leaves palmate with blunt lobes and long petioles, stems almost smanto DESCRIPTION: rounded Biennial from a taproot. Rosette leaves numerous. 1-4' (2.5-10 nearly to kidney-shaped with 3-7 blunt, shallow lobes; often slightly ruffled. cm) long, is usually a deep maroon area where the petiole attaches. The surface is hairless or There and rather glossy above, usually with sparse and tiny hairs below. Veins and veinlets nearly so depressed above and protrude below. Margins have blunt or wavy teeth. Petioles several are Rare in mapped times blade length, rounded below and flat to faintly channeled above, often with a narrow area. Occasional line of hairs running along the top. Stems 1.5-5' (45-150 cm) tall, usually clumped, mostly e'sewhere. erect (especially in competition) but may be leaning or decumbent without competition, solid, roundish but faintly angled, branched (but not at the base, and the branches of erect stems remain short). The surface is hairless to sparsely hairy, occasionally roughened. Stem leaves 2-6" (5-15 cm) long, alternate, more deeply lobed than basal leaves, with sharper teeth and lobes, the blades more ruffled, and the petioles shorter. Stipules linear to triangular, 4-9 mm Inflorescence axillary clusters of 3-22 on pedicels and peduncles ranging from almost sessile to 2" (5 cm) long. Flower (summer and fall) 0.9-1.9" (23-48 mm) across with 3 elliptic to lanceolate bracts just behind the calyx of 5 broadly triangular sepals. Petals 5, longer than wide, widest at the tip with a rounded notch like a fishtail; long and narrow proximally with dense, short hairs near the base, pink to pale purple with darker streaks along the veins. The column is pink-purple but the anthers white. Fruit wheel- shaped, 7-10 mm wide and 3 mm thick, pale green at first drying to brown. composed of 10-12 parts (carpels), the back roughened by raised veins. The calyx persists and wraps around the fruit. HABITAT: Weedy edges of yards and parks, disturbed forests. Introduced. FOOD USE: The greens can be eaten raw or cooked almost all growing season, but are best when new and tender in spring and early summer. Older leaves can still be used as a soup thickener. Flowers and buds are edible, the former making a pretty garnish. Immature fruits, while still green, make a fun nibble or vegetable. COMMENTS: This species is common and well-known in Europe. In North America it is often grown in flower gardens but only rarely does it escape and persist. Young plants, especially when growing along the ground, look much like common mallow M. neglecta-but once they stand up or flower the differences become obvious. Since it is cultivated the genetics are especially diverse, making the form also and size highly variable. Adding confusion, this species is often called "common mallow." 