BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
7 Musk mallow
2
2
Malva moschata Malvaceae (Mallow family)
QUICK CHECK: Waist-high stalk; leaves deeply palmately lobed; flowers large and pink
with 5 petals. ID difficulty 1.
Perennial to 50" (125 cm) tall, from a taproot, usually with multiple stems.
DESCRIPTION: leaves and lower stem leaves round in outline, 2-3" (5-8 cm) across, lobes palmately often
lobed Basal with usually 5 major lobes, typically deep but sometimes shallow, the hairs;
lobed blunt with blunt teeth near the tips. The upper surface has short, sparse
there again, longer hairs below and on the margins. Major veins palmate and depressed above. Petioles 2-3
times are blade length, hollow, hairy, rounded beneath, channeled on top, sparsely covered with long erect hairs
Stems erect to slightly leaning, rounded, 5-12 mm thick, gently zigzag, solid or pithy inside, green, sparsely
coated with stiff hairs. Branches minor, ascending from upper leaf axils. Stem leaves alternate, on progres-
sively shorter petioles, similar to basal leaves but larger, with narrower and more deeply cut lobes, the 3 or 5
main sections cut nearly to the base and deeply lobed themselves. Stipules triangular, 3-9 mm long, entire
or with 1-2 teeth. Inflorescence a compact terminal cluster of about a dozen, the pedicels 8-10 mm, hairy,
with a linear bract that is sometimes toothed at the base. Flower buds have raised ridges where the edges of
the 5 hairy, triangular sepals meet. Flowers subtended by 2-3 linear, ciliate bracts. Corolla 2-2.3" (5-6 cm)
across with 5 thin, pink (occasionally white) veiny petals narrowed at the base, where the sides are fuzzy; the
tip is shallowly but broadly notched (like a fish tail). Fruit a flattened wheel surrounded loosely by papery
sepals; upon maturity the carpels break apart and rattle loose within them. LYDS nearly black, moderately
stiff, sometimes standing.
HABITAT: Disturbed ground in sun to moderate shade; forest edges, open woods, brushy areas, vacant lots,
trailsides, ditches. Introduced.
FOOD USE: All the tender parts are edible, but the young leaves and flower bud clusters are best.
COMMENTS: Despite the name, 1 don't find this plant very musky. This attractive non-native is not very
invasive; though widespread it is usually not abundant. It is not quite as good as some of the other mallows,
mostly because the parts get tough sooner, but if it grows near you it is worth adding to your foraging repertoire.
386
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY 7 Musk mallow 2 2 Malva moschata Malvaceae (Mallow family) QUICK CHECK: Waist-high stalk; leaves deeply palmately lobed; flowers large and pink with 5 petals. ID difficulty 1. Perennial to 50" (125 cm) tall, from a taproot, usually with multiple stems. DESCRIPTION: leaves and lower stem leaves round in outline, 2-3" (5-8 cm) across, lobes palmately often lobed Basal with usually 5 major lobes, typically deep but sometimes shallow, the hairs; lobed blunt with blunt teeth near the tips. The upper surface has short, sparse there again, longer hairs below and on the margins. Major veins palmate and depressed above. Petioles 2-3 times are blade length, hollow, hairy, rounded beneath, channeled on top, sparsely covered with long erect hairs Stems erect to slightly leaning, rounded, 5-12 mm thick, gently zigzag, solid or pithy inside, green, sparsely coated with stiff hairs. Branches minor, ascending from upper leaf axils. Stem leaves alternate, on progres- sively shorter petioles, similar to basal leaves but larger, with narrower and more deeply cut lobes, the 3 or 5 main sections cut nearly to the base and deeply lobed themselves. Stipules triangular, 3-9 mm long, entire or with 1-2 teeth. Inflorescence a compact terminal cluster of about a dozen, the pedicels 8-10 mm, hairy, with a linear bract that is sometimes toothed at the base. Flower buds have raised ridges where the edges of the 5 hairy, triangular sepals meet. Flowers subtended by 2-3 linear, ciliate bracts. Corolla 2-2.3" (5-6 cm) across with 5 thin, pink (occasionally white) veiny petals narrowed at the base, where the sides are fuzzy; the tip is shallowly but broadly notched (like a fish tail). Fruit a flattened wheel surrounded loosely by papery sepals; upon maturity the carpels break apart and rattle loose within them. LYDS nearly black, moderately stiff, sometimes standing. HABITAT: Disturbed ground in sun to moderate shade; forest edges, open woods, brushy areas, vacant lots, trailsides, ditches. Introduced. FOOD USE: All the tender parts are edible, but the young leaves and flower bud clusters are best. COMMENTS: Despite the name, 1 don't find this plant very musky. This attractive non-native is not very invasive; though widespread it is usually not abundant. It is not quite as good as some of the other mallows, mostly because the parts get tough sooner, but if it grows near you it is worth adding to your foraging repertoire. 386 