BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
Glade mallow
2
3
2
3
2
9
Napaea dioica Malvaceae (Mallow family)
large palmately lobed leaves; thin stems reach difficulty over your 1. head;
QUICK clusters CHECK: of relatively Very small white flowers with five petals. ID
large Perennial from large, long, often hollow, sometimes multi-crowned round
DESCRIPTION: whitish, semi-fibrous a flesh. Basal leaves 8-20" (20-50 cm) across, cut nearly to
taproot with with major lobes radiating almost symmetrically, the sinuses lobed further.
the center; each have erratic, blunt-tipped teeth. Both surfaces are covered with hairs. (25-70 Veins cm) long palmate, and
in outline, 7-9 lobe in turn is pinnately lobed, and some of these lobes are stiff
Lobe margins above; only large, major veins protrude below. Petioles erect to leaning, 10-28" of short,
depressed thick, the top roundish to slightly flattened, light green, solid, roughened by Stems clumps stiff,
5-12 mm to appressed hairs. The blade is cut to the center where the petiole attaches. but with erect, single or
few, leaning 5-7' (1.5-2.1 m) tall and 0.4-0.6" (10-15 mm) thick, zigzag, green, solid, hairy, roundish a tapering
ridge below each petiole. Stem leaves few, alternate, widely spaced, similar to basal leaves but smaller, the
petioles progressively shorter. Stipules strap-like, to 1.6" (4 cm) long, wavy, tapered to a point, green at first
then withering. Inflorescence roundish panicles with umbel-like junctures, the branches flattened, hairy, with
many small ridges, bearing occasional ovate bracts 3-5 mm. Flowers have a calyx of 5 triangular green sepals.
The open corolla is 0.6" (15 mm) across with 5 cupped, broadly elliptic, white petals, separate but overlapping,
each with a narrow, hairy, stalked base. A white column protrudes in the
center. Fruit wheel-like, 8-10 mm across.
HABITAT: Moist prairies and meadows, oak savannahs, streamside open-
ings. Locations with very rich soil, much sun, and soil disturbance. Native.
FOOD USE: The roots are large and only slightly stringy, with excel-
lent flavor. Young petioles and peeled shoots are large and excellent.
Leaves are tender at first but become slightly coarse even while still
ruffled; after this they should be cooked or used in a smoothie. Flowers
and flower buds are also good. All these parts are slimy, and make a
good soup thickener. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: A giant mallow with mild-flavored greens-what more
could a mallow muncher ask for? This unique plant is the only member
of its genus. Its distribution is limited and it has lost most of its habitat
to agriculture. If you have an appropriate location, plant a glade mallow
I that will provide food and beauty beyond your lifetime. The only roots
have eaten were those damaged in transplanting-wild plants are too
precious to kill for the root.
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY Glade mallow 2 3 2 3 2 9 Napaea dioica Malvaceae (Mallow family) large palmately lobed leaves; thin stems reach difficulty over your 1. head; QUICK clusters CHECK: of relatively Very small white flowers with five petals. ID large Perennial from large, long, often hollow, sometimes multi-crowned round DESCRIPTION: whitish, semi-fibrous a flesh. Basal leaves 8-20" (20-50 cm) across, cut nearly to taproot with with major lobes radiating almost symmetrically, the sinuses lobed further. the center; each have erratic, blunt-tipped teeth. Both surfaces are covered with hairs. (25-70 Veins cm) long palmate, and in outline, 7-9 lobe in turn is pinnately lobed, and some of these lobes are stiff Lobe margins above; only large, major veins protrude below. Petioles erect to leaning, 10-28" of short, depressed thick, the top roundish to slightly flattened, light green, solid, roughened by Stems clumps stiff, 5-12 mm to appressed hairs. The blade is cut to the center where the petiole attaches. but with erect, single or few, leaning 5-7' (1.5-2.1 m) tall and 0.4-0.6" (10-15 mm) thick, zigzag, green, solid, hairy, roundish a tapering ridge below each petiole. Stem leaves few, alternate, widely spaced, similar to basal leaves but smaller, the petioles progressively shorter. Stipules strap-like, to 1.6" (4 cm) long, wavy, tapered to a point, green at first then withering. Inflorescence roundish panicles with umbel-like junctures, the branches flattened, hairy, with many small ridges, bearing occasional ovate bracts 3-5 mm. Flowers have a calyx of 5 triangular green sepals. The open corolla is 0.6" (15 mm) across with 5 cupped, broadly elliptic, white petals, separate but overlapping, each with a narrow, hairy, stalked base. A white column protrudes in the center. Fruit wheel-like, 8-10 mm across. HABITAT: Moist prairies and meadows, oak savannahs, streamside open- ings. Locations with very rich soil, much sun, and soil disturbance. Native. FOOD USE: The roots are large and only slightly stringy, with excel- lent flavor. Young petioles and peeled shoots are large and excellent. Leaves are tender at first but become slightly coarse even while still ruffled; after this they should be cooked or used in a smoothie. Flowers and flower buds are also good. All these parts are slimy, and make a good soup thickener. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: A giant mallow with mild-flavored greens-what more could a mallow muncher ask for? This unique plant is the only member of its genus. Its distribution is limited and it has lost most of its habitat to agriculture. If you have an appropriate location, plant a glade mallow I that will provide food and beauty beyond your lifetime. The only roots have eaten were those damaged in transplanting-wild plants are too precious to kill for the root. 