"OCEOE (Mallow family)
BASAL LEAVES LOBED PRESENT, LEAVES
OR DIVIDED, SAP ALTERNATE, NOT MILKY
10 Biennial waterleaf
2
3
Hydrophyllum appendiculatum
family Hydrophyllaceae
QUICK lately CHECK: divided Maple like, halry stem leaves, basal
with a broad, palmate, terminal lohe ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: (13-20 cm) long, Biennial or short-lived perennial herb from a root luster
much larger several in a rosette, pinnately divided with } / major divisions. Basal leaves 2
one watermarked in with 3 major lobes. The blade center and tooth sinus bases are the terminal
and follows the spring. The watermark of side lobes or divisions is elongated, often prominently
on mature leaves. midvein. Petioles The upper surface has long, soft hairs. Veins depressed triangular above
tall and up to 0.6" flat-topped with a sharp, winged edge near the base Stems Teeth In blunt incometed
hairs that in cross-section with 2 opposite ridges, the surface covered with /ig/ag. sold to
part diamond-shaped (15 mm) thick, often multiple, erect to leaning, light green, slightly
of upon blade close examination can be seen to have two distinct lengths. Stem leaves erect alternate, to nase levening
30-40% length, the blades 3-6" (8-25 cm) long, not divided nor cut dose to the midvein, or
strange or way that is between palmate and pinnate, the lobe tips elongated and sharp, the teeth few. 5-/ wide Iched
wide rounded, with claw-tips. Inflorescence a dichotomously branching, broad, one-sided cluster angled
of containing several flowers that extend above the leaves. Flowers 0.6-0.8' (15-20 mm) across with
5 narrow, hairy, pointed, triangular lobes and a corolla of 5 broad, irregular-rimmed, light-purp petals sed
at the base, the stamens and pistils extending beyond the petals (but not as far as with other waterleaf
fruit is a 3-4 mm capsule with
few seeds.
HABITAT: Hardwood forests
with very rich, moist 50 tyoi
cally in deep shade; lower shoper
valleys, and small floodpia os
Native.
FOOD USE: The leaves, best
when young in spring and to i
lesser extent again in fall car
eaten raw or cooked. The young
shoots, available in mid to are
spring. are sweeter and more
tender than those of Virginia
waterleaf and make d delicious
nibble-leave some on each plant
to go to seed. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: The leaves are
strikingly beautiful in early spring
when the watermarks are vivid.
This species requires distur-
bance, hence its appearance on
steep wooded slopes and in small
stream valleys. hear non spe
cific reports of eating waterleat
roots; those of this species might
be good but haven tried them
AKA great wateriear append
aged waterleaf If youlook rosely
at the base of the note between
two sepais and you act 3 (III)
long biangular thingy that looks
like J iminiature sepal. folded
away from the flower you have
found the namesake appendage.
389
"OCEOE (Mallow family) BASAL LEAVES LOBED PRESENT, LEAVES OR DIVIDED, SAP ALTERNATE, NOT MILKY 10 Biennial waterleaf 2 3 Hydrophyllum appendiculatum family Hydrophyllaceae QUICK lately CHECK: divided Maple like, halry stem leaves, basal with a broad, palmate, terminal lohe ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: (13-20 cm) long, Biennial or short-lived perennial herb from a root luster much larger several in a rosette, pinnately divided with } / major divisions. Basal leaves 2 one watermarked in with 3 major lobes. The blade center and tooth sinus bases are the terminal and follows the spring. The watermark of side lobes or divisions is elongated, often prominently on mature leaves. midvein. Petioles The upper surface has long, soft hairs. Veins depressed triangular above tall and up to 0.6" flat-topped with a sharp, winged edge near the base Stems Teeth In blunt incometed hairs that in cross-section with 2 opposite ridges, the surface covered with /ig/ag. sold to part diamond-shaped (15 mm) thick, often multiple, erect to leaning, light green, slightly of upon blade close examination can be seen to have two distinct lengths. Stem leaves erect alternate, to nase levening 30-40% length, the blades 3-6" (8-25 cm) long, not divided nor cut dose to the midvein, or strange or way that is between palmate and pinnate, the lobe tips elongated and sharp, the teeth few. 5-/ wide Iched wide rounded, with claw-tips. Inflorescence a dichotomously branching, broad, one-sided cluster angled of containing several flowers that extend above the leaves. Flowers 0.6-0.8' (15-20 mm) across with 5 narrow, hairy, pointed, triangular lobes and a corolla of 5 broad, irregular-rimmed, light-purp petals sed at the base, the stamens and pistils extending beyond the petals (but not as far as with other waterleaf fruit is a 3-4 mm capsule with few seeds. HABITAT: Hardwood forests with very rich, moist 50 tyoi cally in deep shade; lower shoper valleys, and small floodpia os Native. FOOD USE: The leaves, best when young in spring and to i lesser extent again in fall car eaten raw or cooked. The young shoots, available in mid to are spring. are sweeter and more tender than those of Virginia waterleaf and make d delicious nibble-leave some on each plant to go to seed. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: The leaves are strikingly beautiful in early spring when the watermarks are vivid. This species requires distur- bance, hence its appearance on steep wooded slopes and in small stream valleys. hear non spe cific reports of eating waterleat roots; those of this species might be good but haven tried them AKA great wateriear append aged waterleaf If youlook rosely at the base of the note between two sepais and you act 3 (III) long biangular thingy that looks like J iminiature sepal. folded away from the flower you have found the namesake appendage. 389 