phyllum canadense
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
CONFUSING PLANTS: Purple phacelia (p. 437) has compound
leaves and flowers with wide spreading petals. Young leaves of
sochan (p. 380) are more rigid, less hairy, not as deeply divided nor
sharply toothed; they have fewer lobes and lack watermarks
HABITAT: Hardwood forests with rich soil, especially slopes
and floodplains. Native.
FOOD USE: Young leaves in spring, while still small and water-
marked, can be eaten raw or cooked. A few tender leaves appear
again in fall and can be nibbled until winter. Shoots are tender
and juicy, sweet with a slight astringency; I like them raw. Con-
servation 1.
COMMENTS: The greens are not fantastic but are often extremely
abundant and have a long season of availability. Virginia waterleaf
is what I call an "optional ephemeral"-most leaves die back in
summer, but some of those with more sunlight persist.
Related edible:
macrophyllum
1
1
This 13 species Large is hairier waterleaf and has white (occasionally light more pink) widely flowers. spaced The and leaves toothed are but longer. not
Hydrophyllum
usually lobed. The with 5-9 9-13 leaves major are lobes arranged or divisions in a waterleaf. regular that are rosette. This species Stems and is found petioles on well-drained have longer of our
family
slopes and denser with hairs rich soil. than The those leaves of Virginia and stalks, while edible, are the least palatable
waterleafs. ID difficulty 1. Conservation 2.
391
phyllum canadense BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY CONFUSING PLANTS: Purple phacelia (p. 437) has compound leaves and flowers with wide spreading petals. Young leaves of sochan (p. 380) are more rigid, less hairy, not as deeply divided nor sharply toothed; they have fewer lobes and lack watermarks HABITAT: Hardwood forests with rich soil, especially slopes and floodplains. Native. FOOD USE: Young leaves in spring, while still small and water- marked, can be eaten raw or cooked. A few tender leaves appear again in fall and can be nibbled until winter. Shoots are tender and juicy, sweet with a slight astringency; I like them raw. Con- servation 1. COMMENTS: The greens are not fantastic but are often extremely abundant and have a long season of availability. Virginia waterleaf is what I call an "optional ephemeral"-most leaves die back in summer, but some of those with more sunlight persist. Related edible: macrophyllum 1 1 This 13 species Large is hairier waterleaf and has white (occasionally light more pink) widely flowers. spaced The and leaves toothed are but longer. not Hydrophyllum usually lobed. The with 5-9 9-13 leaves major are lobes arranged or divisions in a waterleaf. regular that are rosette. This species Stems and is found petioles on well-drained have longer of our family slopes and denser with hairs rich soil. than The those leaves of Virginia and stalks, while edible, are the least palatable waterleafs. ID difficulty 1. Conservation 2. 391 