BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
Related edible
11
Broad
waterleaf
Hydrophyllum
canadense
2
2
by rhizomes, the basal leaves borne singly or in blade; clumps it is of deeply a few.
Perennial Basal leaves spreading have a large terminal division comprising cul into 5-7 almost major all lobes, of the each with smaller
lobes or large, rounded teeth. There are
only 1-4 much smaller, fully separated side
divisions, often widely spaced from the ter-
minal. The watermarks are splotchy and
amorphous (not distinctly following the midvein of lateral lobes).
Stems shorter and less robust than those of our other waterleafs.
The later basal leaves and stem leaves lack watermarks and are
palmately lobed, not divided, with sharp, elongated lobe tips
and sharp teeth. The two kinds of lower leaves are about the
same size and often intermingle, and because the coloration,
shape, tooth shape, and vein depth all differ, it may appear that
two different species
are present. The peti-
oles are nearly hair-
less on stem leaves.
Flowers white, not
spreading open, the
clusters hidden under
the leaves rather than
rising above them.
Broad waterleaf likes
moist, rich soil in
deep shade. The best
part to eat is the new,
glossy, still-folded
leaf. Conservation 2.
12 Virginia waterleaf
1
2
FH-306
Hydrophyllum virginianum
family Hydrophyllaceae
watermarks QUICK CHECK: Short, finely hairy herb with pinnately divided leaves
in spring; purplish 5-petal flowers with protruding stamens. ID bearing difficulty gray
as with leaves or DESCRIPTION: or 4 divided, well of stiff these 2-6, as appressed some with usually lobed usually autumn Perennial again. stacked hairs. 5-7 leaves, Blades in Major from major 2-ranked a have much veins thick, divisions clumps, paler deeply short, cut beneath, to scaly depressed fully 10" (25 rhizome, or the nearly cm) upper (less long, all to surface so parts the deeply when rachis, finely densely pinnately young). often hairy. covered The with lobed Basal 2. 2
and sometimes teeth; summer leaves lack distinct gray-white watermarks at the base first leaves of spring,
nearly Stem nearly with longer rarely 120-150% sides acute, rusty numerous running leaves wool and in than wrapped white), middle, of sharp on the few, blade down each young petals, kinky with in up smaller, one length to with from claw leaves. 16" threads or the a two (40 petiole tips. on on keel shorter Stems cm) lower leaves. inside, Petioles on margins; tall, the leaves. usually Inflorescence petioles. roughly 11:14 outside, broadly them. purple The mm multiple, diamond-shaped Clusters spreading but Margins petiole long. at shallowly the a branched, often Petals of base, base dark, unopened forked is 5, green channeled, in hairy, flared fused crowded, cross-section, near with flower and and at the scattered the sometimes irregularly one-sided sheath-like, buds base base, solid, form of and purple light the toothed, cluster. with recurved, again hairy often sinuses 2 streaks wings balls, near Flowers lined the often between teeth on the above sometimes with opposite reddish, bell-like top large, lobes lo that. but g,
390 anthers dark and long. Fruit a roundish slightly, capsule blunt-tipped. 3-4 mm Stamens long containing purple and style (occasionally 2-4 are seeds. much
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY Related edible 11 Broad waterleaf Hydrophyllum canadense 2 2 by rhizomes, the basal leaves borne singly or in blade; clumps it is of deeply a few. Perennial Basal leaves spreading have a large terminal division comprising cul into 5-7 almost major all lobes, of the each with smaller lobes or large, rounded teeth. There are only 1-4 much smaller, fully separated side divisions, often widely spaced from the ter- minal. The watermarks are splotchy and amorphous (not distinctly following the midvein of lateral lobes). Stems shorter and less robust than those of our other waterleafs. The later basal leaves and stem leaves lack watermarks and are palmately lobed, not divided, with sharp, elongated lobe tips and sharp teeth. The two kinds of lower leaves are about the same size and often intermingle, and because the coloration, shape, tooth shape, and vein depth all differ, it may appear that two different species are present. The peti- oles are nearly hair- less on stem leaves. Flowers white, not spreading open, the clusters hidden under the leaves rather than rising above them. Broad waterleaf likes moist, rich soil in deep shade. The best part to eat is the new, glossy, still-folded leaf. Conservation 2. 12 Virginia waterleaf 1 2 FH-306 Hydrophyllum virginianum family Hydrophyllaceae watermarks QUICK CHECK: Short, finely hairy herb with pinnately divided leaves in spring; purplish 5-petal flowers with protruding stamens. ID bearing difficulty gray as with leaves or DESCRIPTION: or 4 divided, well of stiff these 2-6, as appressed some with usually lobed usually autumn Perennial again. stacked hairs. 5-7 leaves, Blades in Major from major 2-ranked a have much veins thick, divisions clumps, paler deeply short, cut beneath, to scaly depressed fully 10" (25 rhizome, or the nearly cm) upper (less long, all to surface so parts the deeply when rachis, finely densely pinnately young). often hairy. covered The with lobed Basal 2. 2 and sometimes teeth; summer leaves lack distinct gray-white watermarks at the base first leaves of spring, nearly Stem nearly with longer rarely 120-150% sides acute, rusty numerous running leaves wool and in than wrapped white), middle, of sharp on the few, blade down each young petals, kinky with in up smaller, one length to with from claw leaves. 16" threads or the a two (40 petiole tips. on on keel shorter Stems cm) lower leaves. inside, Petioles on margins; tall, the leaves. usually Inflorescence petioles. roughly 11:14 outside, broadly them. purple The mm multiple, diamond-shaped Clusters spreading but Margins petiole long. at shallowly the a branched, often Petals of base, base dark, unopened forked is 5, green channeled, in hairy, flared fused crowded, cross-section, near with flower and and at the scattered the sometimes irregularly one-sided sheath-like, buds base base, solid, form of and purple light the toothed, cluster. with recurved, again hairy often sinuses 2 streaks wings balls, near Flowers lined the often between teeth on the above sometimes with opposite reddish, bell-like top large, lobes lo that. but g, 390 anthers dark and long. Fruit a roundish slightly, capsule blunt-tipped. 3-4 mm Stamens long containing purple and style (occasionally 2-4 are seeds. much 