iolaceae
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
15 Compass plant
2
Silphium laciniatum
Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK with CHECK: Enormous, deeply-lobed, erect, flattened
s' is yellow sunflower-like heads, ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: rosettes, Perennial from a large root. Basal leaves several but not
to (80 enormous, vertical, twisting into one plane to optimize sunlight exposure, always the in clear
both 32" cm) long and 18" (46 cm) wide. Blades are very rough, leathery, blade
sides, deeply cut into many long, narrow lobes, these lobed again, mostly stiff-hairy blunt- on
pointed; hard to the which margins with stiff hairs but not toothed. Veins wide, flat and protruding above
say side is which on a vertical leaf), rounded and protruding below, offset from (although the is
pale green color (the midvein sometimes reddish). Veinlets are rough-reticulate on both sides. Petioles plade by
with a sheath at the base, 6-16" (15-40 cm) tall and up to 0.7" (18 mm) thick, not channeled, rounded. erect
with scattered stiff hairs. Stems single or clumped, erect, unbranched, to 0.8" (2 cm) thick and 8' (2.1 solid. tall.
round, solid, light green or reddish, roughened with stiff, curvy or kinked hairs. Stem leaves have a m) sheath
wrapped around the stem; they are similar to the basal leaves but smaller, often erect and appressed to the
stem. Petioles progressively shorten; uppermost leaves are sessile. Inflorescence a raceme-like cluster of
a few to a dozen heads, widely spaced (or in widely-spaced sets of 2-3), the peduncles 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long,
often twisting to one side, each pedicel with a pinnately cut bract at its base. Heads (mid summer to early
fall) 2.5-4" (6.5-10 cm) across with ray and disk florets. Rays are yellow and notched at the tip. Disk flowers
are tubular, yellow, and 5-lobed. Heads are subtended by large, stiff, hairy, layered bracts, the tips long and
narrow with inrolled margins.
HABITAT: Rich, well-drained soil in full sun: tallgrass prairies, mixed prairies, rocky outcroppings, roadsides,
oak savannahs. Native.
FOOD USE: The shoots can be peeled and eaten raw or cooked. They are slightly astringent and aromatic.
The cut stems exude a gum that some people like to chew. Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: This is one of our most striking and unmistakable plants, and it is often used in landscap ng
for its giant, unique leaves and gorgeous flowers. In the wild, compass plant has suffered enormously from
habitat loss-but robust plants can handle losing an occasional shoot. The plants can live for hundreds of
years-so plant and tend a few for your grandchildren to enjoy.
393
iolaceae BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY 15 Compass plant 2 Silphium laciniatum Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK with CHECK: Enormous, deeply-lobed, erect, flattened s' is yellow sunflower-like heads, ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: rosettes, Perennial from a large root. Basal leaves several but not to (80 enormous, vertical, twisting into one plane to optimize sunlight exposure, always the in clear both 32" cm) long and 18" (46 cm) wide. Blades are very rough, leathery, blade sides, deeply cut into many long, narrow lobes, these lobed again, mostly stiff-hairy blunt- on pointed; hard to the which margins with stiff hairs but not toothed. Veins wide, flat and protruding above say side is which on a vertical leaf), rounded and protruding below, offset from (although the is pale green color (the midvein sometimes reddish). Veinlets are rough-reticulate on both sides. Petioles plade by with a sheath at the base, 6-16" (15-40 cm) tall and up to 0.7" (18 mm) thick, not channeled, rounded. erect with scattered stiff hairs. Stems single or clumped, erect, unbranched, to 0.8" (2 cm) thick and 8' (2.1 solid. tall. round, solid, light green or reddish, roughened with stiff, curvy or kinked hairs. Stem leaves have a m) sheath wrapped around the stem; they are similar to the basal leaves but smaller, often erect and appressed to the stem. Petioles progressively shorten; uppermost leaves are sessile. Inflorescence a raceme-like cluster of a few to a dozen heads, widely spaced (or in widely-spaced sets of 2-3), the peduncles 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long, often twisting to one side, each pedicel with a pinnately cut bract at its base. Heads (mid summer to early fall) 2.5-4" (6.5-10 cm) across with ray and disk florets. Rays are yellow and notched at the tip. Disk flowers are tubular, yellow, and 5-lobed. Heads are subtended by large, stiff, hairy, layered bracts, the tips long and narrow with inrolled margins. HABITAT: Rich, well-drained soil in full sun: tallgrass prairies, mixed prairies, rocky outcroppings, roadsides, oak savannahs. Native. FOOD USE: The shoots can be peeled and eaten raw or cooked. They are slightly astringent and aromatic. The cut stems exude a gum that some people like to chew. Conservation 3. COMMENTS: This is one of our most striking and unmistakable plants, and it is often used in landscap ng for its giant, unique leaves and gorgeous flowers. In the wild, compass plant has suffered enormously from habitat loss-but robust plants can handle losing an occasional shoot. The plants can live for hundreds of years-so plant and tend a few for your grandchildren to enjoy. 393 