LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE,
BASAL LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT
Pansy Viola bicolor The family Violaceae
2
14
herb appearing to have 3 leaves difficulty per node, 1. two of them lobed;
QUICK CHECK: Short flowers on nodding stems. ID
two-toned, violet-shaped Annual to 18" (46 cm) tall, with a wintergreen times the odor, blade especially length, broadly in the roots. ovate
Basal DESCRIPTION: leaves 0.4-0.8" not (1-2 lobed, cm) the long, surface on petioles hairless 1.5-3 or with veins sparse, are obscure. minute hairs; Margins withering mostly above,
to nearly rounded, Midvein flat to faintly depressed; other near the base and green
3-sided,
with
a
entire, late in flowering. sometimes each angle. with One a of few the small sides teeth. is smaller Stems than solid, the They purple other may two, creep giving before the stem turning a channeled erect and often appearance. 0.6-1.2" branch
wing Stems on may the be hairless base. Ascending or have hairs branches on the are angles occasionally only. produced in or the with upper a long-tapered part. Stem base leaves and a flat,
at or near spoon-shaped, abruptly narrowed begins.)
(15-30 mm) long, 80-120% oblanceolate of the blade to length. (It is hard to say where the petiole are ends lobed; and regular the taper leaves are not.
winged The blades petiole are entire or with a few teeth, the margins without cilia. Stipules
Stipules large, clasping, and deeply
lobed near the base, the lobes long
and finger-like; stipules become more
prominent at the upper nodes, some-
times equal to the leaf in size, giving
the appearance of 3 leaves at a node.
Flowers borne singly on long, thin,
nodding stems. Sepais 5, pointed,
ear-like at the base, making for a
crown-like structure on the droop-
ing flower bud. Corolla 7-9 mm long,
bluish or white with blue veins, the
center yellow, consisting of 5 petals
arranged asymmetrically, the side
petals with "hairy armpits." Fruit an
ovoid capsule 4-7 mm long, breaking
into sections.
HABITAT: Fields, pastures, mead-
ows, lawns, open grassy woods.
Native.
FOOD USE: Eat all tender parts,
including the flowers, in spring. They
are pleasant raw as a nibble or in sal-
ads, with an interesting wintergreen
flavor. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is an excellent
"gateway edible" from the front
lawn. The leaf-and-stipule clusters
are diagnostic, and the wintergreen
flavor begs you to bite,
RELATED EDIBLE: Viola arvensis,
the European field pansy, 15 a close
relative that has escaped from gar-
dens and is widely established in
much of the same range as our native
species. Most parts are larger and the
upper leaves are more toothed. It can
DE used similarly for food.
392
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE, BASAL LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT Pansy Viola bicolor The family Violaceae 2 14 herb appearing to have 3 leaves difficulty per node, 1. two of them lobed; QUICK CHECK: Short flowers on nodding stems. ID two-toned, violet-shaped Annual to 18" (46 cm) tall, with a wintergreen times the odor, blade especially length, broadly in the roots. ovate Basal DESCRIPTION: leaves 0.4-0.8" not (1-2 lobed, cm) the long, surface on petioles hairless 1.5-3 or with veins sparse, are obscure. minute hairs; Margins withering mostly above, to nearly rounded, Midvein flat to faintly depressed; other near the base and green 3-sided, with a entire, late in flowering. sometimes each angle. with One a of few the small sides teeth. is smaller Stems than solid, the They purple other may two, creep giving before the stem turning a channeled erect and often appearance. 0.6-1.2" branch wing Stems on may the be hairless base. Ascending or have hairs branches on the are angles occasionally only. produced in or the with upper a long-tapered part. Stem base leaves and a flat, at or near spoon-shaped, abruptly narrowed begins.) (15-30 mm) long, 80-120% oblanceolate of the blade to length. (It is hard to say where the petiole are ends lobed; and regular the taper leaves are not. winged The blades petiole are entire or with a few teeth, the margins without cilia. Stipules Stipules large, clasping, and deeply lobed near the base, the lobes long and finger-like; stipules become more prominent at the upper nodes, some- times equal to the leaf in size, giving the appearance of 3 leaves at a node. Flowers borne singly on long, thin, nodding stems. Sepais 5, pointed, ear-like at the base, making for a crown-like structure on the droop- ing flower bud. Corolla 7-9 mm long, bluish or white with blue veins, the center yellow, consisting of 5 petals arranged asymmetrically, the side petals with "hairy armpits." Fruit an ovoid capsule 4-7 mm long, breaking into sections. HABITAT: Fields, pastures, mead- ows, lawns, open grassy woods. Native. FOOD USE: Eat all tender parts, including the flowers, in spring. They are pleasant raw as a nibble or in sal- ads, with an interesting wintergreen flavor. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is an excellent "gateway edible" from the front lawn. The leaf-and-stipule clusters are diagnostic, and the wintergreen flavor begs you to bite, RELATED EDIBLE: Viola arvensis, the European field pansy, 15 a close relative that has escaped from gar- dens and is widely established in much of the same range as our native species. Most parts are larger and the upper leaves are more toothed. It can DE used similarly for food. 392 