men
0
1cm
BASAL LEAVESPRESENT,LEAVES LOBED OR DIVIDED,SAP
Ox-eye daisy
ALTERNATE, NOT MILKY
2
Chrysanthemum leucanthemum NG-423
Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK oad, flat, CHECK: yellow Small disk with hairless large leaves, white rays. wider ID toward difficulty the tip, with large bluns
DESCRIPTION: and spoon-like Erect perennial herb. Basal leaves 2-6" 2.
smooth, hairless. in outline, tapered at the base, dark (5-15 cm) long, in rosettes. blurt
rounded. Midvein Margins whitish, irregularly flat; and deeply toothed green or and shallowly glossy lobed, above, the slightly teeth fleshy,
blade length, channeled, secondary veins mostly obscure and flat. Petiole mostly
main blade. Stems winged, keeled near the base, bearing occasional 40-80% of
from each petiole, usually hairless multiple, or with 18-34" (45-85 cm) tall and 4-6 mm thick, tiny angled, lobes with widely 3 separated from the
is always taller than sparse, fine hairs. Ascending branches ridges running down
wide. Stem leaves alternate, becoming much smaller, arise sessile, from and some clasping axils. on but the the upper plant
stem Flowerheads (sum-
mer) solitar / at the end of
long, grooved peduncles
1.5-2.5" (4-6 cm) across
with a flat yellow disk sur-
rounded by long white ray
florets.
CONFUSING PLANTS:
Daisy fleabanes (genus
Erigeron. greens not edi-
ble) have a similar leaf
shape and share the habi-
tat, however, the leaves
are thinner and hairy with
more prominent second-
ary veins, and the flower-
heads are much smaller.
HABITAT: Roadsides.
pastures, meadows; any
open area with poor. weil-
drained soil and sufficient
moisture Introduced.
FOOD USE: Leaves and
tender stem tips make a
nice addition to salads or
can be eaten as a snack
Their strong, unique fla-
vor is best appreciated
raw.
COMMENTS: This cold-
hardy nibble IS often avail-
able late into fall or winter
and again n very early
spring. Where they grow
large and lush in unusu-
ally fertile conditions
the leaves are especially
good
men 0 1cm BASAL LEAVESPRESENT,LEAVES LOBED OR DIVIDED,SAP Ox-eye daisy ALTERNATE, NOT MILKY 2 Chrysanthemum leucanthemum NG-423 Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK oad, flat, CHECK: yellow Small disk with hairless large leaves, white rays. wider ID toward difficulty the tip, with large bluns DESCRIPTION: and spoon-like Erect perennial herb. Basal leaves 2-6" 2. smooth, hairless. in outline, tapered at the base, dark (5-15 cm) long, in rosettes. blurt rounded. Midvein Margins whitish, irregularly flat; and deeply toothed green or and shallowly glossy lobed, above, the slightly teeth fleshy, blade length, channeled, secondary veins mostly obscure and flat. Petiole mostly main blade. Stems winged, keeled near the base, bearing occasional 40-80% of from each petiole, usually hairless multiple, or with 18-34" (45-85 cm) tall and 4-6 mm thick, tiny angled, lobes with widely 3 separated from the is always taller than sparse, fine hairs. Ascending branches ridges running down wide. Stem leaves alternate, becoming much smaller, arise sessile, from and some clasping axils. on but the the upper plant stem Flowerheads (sum- mer) solitar / at the end of long, grooved peduncles 1.5-2.5" (4-6 cm) across with a flat yellow disk sur- rounded by long white ray florets. CONFUSING PLANTS: Daisy fleabanes (genus Erigeron. greens not edi- ble) have a similar leaf shape and share the habi- tat, however, the leaves are thinner and hairy with more prominent second- ary veins, and the flower- heads are much smaller. HABITAT: Roadsides. pastures, meadows; any open area with poor. weil- drained soil and sufficient moisture Introduced. FOOD USE: Leaves and tender stem tips make a nice addition to salads or can be eaten as a snack Their strong, unique fla- vor is best appreciated raw. COMMENTS: This cold- hardy nibble IS often avail- able late into fall or winter and again n very early spring. Where they grow large and lush in unusu- ally fertile conditions the leaves are especially good 