LOBED BASAL OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE,
16 Lousewort
/
2
2
family
Orobanchaceae
Pedicularis hairy, canadensis stout-stemmed herb with numerous difficulty fern-like 1. basal leaves;
DESCRIPTION irregular Perennial herb from a taprool, Basal also with leaves parasitic numerous, rhizomes. fern-like, Rosettes elliptic both per-
QUICK CHECK: vellow flowers Low, III a densely clustered spike. ID
with sist through a blunt tip, summer 4-7" (10-18 after cm) the stems long and wither. about 1/3 as maroon wide, tapered (especially slightly full-sun toward plants in
ends, early spring), pinnately hairy lobed, on both usually surfaces. green Lobes but often numerous, deep ruffled cut appearance to a uniform (especially depth slightly in full more sun
an
than halfway to the middle, twisted to give the rounded. leaf a The lobes have shallow, rounded protrudir min
the lobes closely and evenly spaced, their secondary tips veins are strongly depressed above, tha
with rounded teeth. 60-120% Midveins of blade and length, solid, sparsely hairy, rounded or decumbent, below, deeper 6-16"
below. Petioles ridge. Stems often clumped, erect to leaning hairs, the
flat proportionately with a double-wing stout, hollow, never branched, densely covered with long, straight
but sometimes maroon (especially early in the season), with above many
green short wings. Stem leaves crowded on the lower stem and sparse to
that, alternate (although upper ones may be almost paired), similar
the basal leaves but smailer, 1.2-2.5" (3-6 cm), on petioles 15-20% of
blade length. Inflorescence a densely hairy terminal spike-like raceme
1.5-2.2" (38-56 mm) long in bloom, tightly packed with flowers and lobed
leafy bracts-expanding up to 7" (18 cm) long in fruit. Flowers 0.6-1"
(15-25 mm) long, irregularly shaped, tubular at the base, broadening into
an upper and lower lip, the upper lip longer and hood-like, hooked over
the lower. Corolla dull yellow to maroon, often bicolored with the upper
lip darker. Flowers are all curved clockwise, giving the spike a distinct look
from the top, like a twirling yellow torch.
HABITAT: Sunny open forests, forest edges and openings, beaver cut-
tings, prairies, fields near woods, on poor or rich soil. Native.
FOOD USE: The young shoots and attached leaves in early spring are
eaten raw or cooked--more commonly cooked. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: Before it could be a popular vegetable, this plant probably
needs a new name.
The flavor is hard
to explain-not
unpleasant when
you're accustomed
to it, but definitely
odd, exemplify-
ing what call the
"parasitic plant
flavor." You'll have
to try it to find out.
AKA wood betony.
WARNING: these
parasitic plains
are known
cheme
from
then
plants
and
394
LOBED BASAL OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE, 16 Lousewort / 2 2 family Orobanchaceae Pedicularis hairy, canadensis stout-stemmed herb with numerous difficulty fern-like 1. basal leaves; DESCRIPTION irregular Perennial herb from a taprool, Basal also with leaves parasitic numerous, rhizomes. fern-like, Rosettes elliptic both per- QUICK CHECK: vellow flowers Low, III a densely clustered spike. ID with sist through a blunt tip, summer 4-7" (10-18 after cm) the stems long and wither. about 1/3 as maroon wide, tapered (especially slightly full-sun toward plants in ends, early spring), pinnately hairy lobed, on both usually surfaces. green Lobes but often numerous, deep ruffled cut appearance to a uniform (especially depth slightly in full more sun an than halfway to the middle, twisted to give the rounded. leaf a The lobes have shallow, rounded protrudir min the lobes closely and evenly spaced, their secondary tips veins are strongly depressed above, tha with rounded teeth. 60-120% Midveins of blade and length, solid, sparsely hairy, rounded or decumbent, below, deeper 6-16" below. Petioles ridge. Stems often clumped, erect to leaning hairs, the flat proportionately with a double-wing stout, hollow, never branched, densely covered with long, straight but sometimes maroon (especially early in the season), with above many green short wings. Stem leaves crowded on the lower stem and sparse to that, alternate (although upper ones may be almost paired), similar the basal leaves but smailer, 1.2-2.5" (3-6 cm), on petioles 15-20% of blade length. Inflorescence a densely hairy terminal spike-like raceme 1.5-2.2" (38-56 mm) long in bloom, tightly packed with flowers and lobed leafy bracts-expanding up to 7" (18 cm) long in fruit. Flowers 0.6-1" (15-25 mm) long, irregularly shaped, tubular at the base, broadening into an upper and lower lip, the upper lip longer and hood-like, hooked over the lower. Corolla dull yellow to maroon, often bicolored with the upper lip darker. Flowers are all curved clockwise, giving the spike a distinct look from the top, like a twirling yellow torch. HABITAT: Sunny open forests, forest edges and openings, beaver cut- tings, prairies, fields near woods, on poor or rich soil. Native. FOOD USE: The young shoots and attached leaves in early spring are eaten raw or cooked--more commonly cooked. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: Before it could be a popular vegetable, this plant probably needs a new name. The flavor is hard to explain-not unpleasant when you're accustomed to it, but definitely odd, exemplify- ing what call the "parasitic plant flavor." You'll have to try it to find out. AKA wood betony. WARNING: these parasitic plains are known cheme from then plants and 394 