LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILK
19 Annual wall rocket
2
Diplotaxis muralis Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
IICK CHECK: Small-leaved, ground-hugging, aromatic mustard with small leaves
ID difficulty 1.
and nearly naked stems bearing yellow flowers and long pods in widely spaced racemes
DESCRIPTION: Annual to short-lived perennial, often with multiple rosettes crowded on a
multi-crowned taproot, which is white and tough with a very hot flavor. Basal leaves 8-14 per
rosette, thick and fleshy, with a strong aroma, the blades 1.5-3" (4-8 cm) long, oblanceolate
in outline, blunt-pointed at the tip and wedge-like at the base. Margins have erratic, large, blun
teeth or shallow pinnate lobes. Surfaces are hairless except for sparse needle-hairs on the margin. M
ish and slightly raised above. Secondary veins scarcely evident and faintly
depressed. Petioles winged, about 20% of blade length. Stems multiple (or
branched at the base), decumbent to leaning or sprawling, 2-3 mm thick,
tough, purple-green, round, solid or with a pinhole hollow, with scattered
needle-like hairs, especially toward the base. Stem leaves few, alternate,
mostly near the base, similar to basal leaves. Inflorescence a terminal
raceme with a few flowers or buds packed at the tip, but lengthening greatly
in fruit so the pods are very widely spaced-sometimes more than 2" (5 cm)
apart. Flowers (summer to fall) 5-8 mm across with 4 broad-tipped yellow
petals (sometimes purple tinted on the outside), opening in the morning,
the sepals about half the petal length. Pods to 1.3" (33 mm) long and rod-
like, roundish to slightly triangular or flattened in cross section, the tip
with a broad, blunt beak falling off at maturity, on spreading to ascending
pedicels 40-100% of pod length.
HABITAT: Disturbed, well-drained, often poor soils in full sun-hot and dry
conditions. Construction sites, yards, beaches, road shoulders. Introduced.
FOOD USE: The succulent leaves remain tender even to maturity. They
make an unexpected nibble or addition to salads, tasting like a hot, aromatic
arugula. The flavor reminds me of blue mustard (p. 402). Just take care to
wash off the dirt. The roots are too tough to use as a vegetable.
COMMENTS: This mustard tastes even stranger than it looks, and the
leaves make an exotic garnish that nobody will have tasted before. This
plant uses a mixture of C3 and C4 photosynthesis strategies.
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILK 19 Annual wall rocket 2 Diplotaxis muralis Brassicaceae (Mustard family) IICK CHECK: Small-leaved, ground-hugging, aromatic mustard with small leaves ID difficulty 1. and nearly naked stems bearing yellow flowers and long pods in widely spaced racemes DESCRIPTION: Annual to short-lived perennial, often with multiple rosettes crowded on a multi-crowned taproot, which is white and tough with a very hot flavor. Basal leaves 8-14 per rosette, thick and fleshy, with a strong aroma, the blades 1.5-3" (4-8 cm) long, oblanceolate in outline, blunt-pointed at the tip and wedge-like at the base. Margins have erratic, large, blun teeth or shallow pinnate lobes. Surfaces are hairless except for sparse needle-hairs on the margin. M ish and slightly raised above. Secondary veins scarcely evident and faintly depressed. Petioles winged, about 20% of blade length. Stems multiple (or branched at the base), decumbent to leaning or sprawling, 2-3 mm thick, tough, purple-green, round, solid or with a pinhole hollow, with scattered needle-like hairs, especially toward the base. Stem leaves few, alternate, mostly near the base, similar to basal leaves. Inflorescence a terminal raceme with a few flowers or buds packed at the tip, but lengthening greatly in fruit so the pods are very widely spaced-sometimes more than 2" (5 cm) apart. Flowers (summer to fall) 5-8 mm across with 4 broad-tipped yellow petals (sometimes purple tinted on the outside), opening in the morning, the sepals about half the petal length. Pods to 1.3" (33 mm) long and rod- like, roundish to slightly triangular or flattened in cross section, the tip with a broad, blunt beak falling off at maturity, on spreading to ascending pedicels 40-100% of pod length. HABITAT: Disturbed, well-drained, often poor soils in full sun-hot and dry conditions. Construction sites, yards, beaches, road shoulders. Introduced. FOOD USE: The succulent leaves remain tender even to maturity. They make an unexpected nibble or addition to salads, tasting like a hot, aromatic arugula. The flavor reminds me of blue mustard (p. 402). Just take care to wash off the dirt. The roots are too tough to use as a vegetable. COMMENTS: This mustard tastes even stranger than it looks, and the leaves make an exotic garnish that nobody will have tasted before. This plant uses a mixture of C3 and C4 photosynthesis strategies. 