BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
18 Cut-leaf evening primrose
1
2
2
Oenothera laciniata
family
Onagraceae
CHECK: Creeping to spreading with many lobed but not toothed difficulty leaves; 1. veins
flat QUICK above; large yellow 4-petal flowers at the end of a long tube. ID
Biennial, the rosette persisting at least to early flowering. Basal leaves entire ellip- but
DESCRIPTION: outline, slightly to moderately soft-hairy, 2-6" (5-15 cm) long, sometimes than wide,
similar usually in length, ruffled-wavy, blunt-tipped, entire or with a few blunt teeth. portion Midvein of the leaf is
tic in deeply pinnately lobed with up to 6 lobes per side, the lobes longer The distal
often unlobed; the tip is blunt or rounded. The base of the blade tapers along the upper petiole. of blade off-
set by light color, flat above; secondary veins are flat or faintly raised above. Petioles 40-70% length,
solid, flat-topped with a keel below, wider than deep, with short, soft hairs on both sides, only winged distally.
Stems multiple; the central ones may be erect but the outer ones are leaning, prostrate, or decumbent, to 30"
(75 cm) long and 7 mm thick, solid, unbranched or with a few major branches, roundish in cross section, covered
with soft hairs. Stem leaves 1-4" (2.5-10 cm) long, shorter distally, sessile except for the lowest ones, com-
monly in offset pairs on the lower stem but the upper leaves are clearly alternate. Blades elliptic to lanceolate,
the major veins whitish and flat above, protruding slightly but flat-bottomed below; lobes tend to be shorter
on stem leaves, sometimes reduced to large teeth. Flowers (spring and summer) borne singly from leaf axils
along the distal stems, appearing to have long hairy pedicels. (The "fake pedicel" consists of a long, striped,
cylindric ovary that later becomes the fruit, and an elongated calyx tube of differing color and texture.) At the
end of the tube are 4 hairy triangular lobes 7-13 mm long, folded back away from the flower. Corolla spreads
0.9-1.5" (23-38 mm) wide with 4 broad yellow petals (fading to orange), each notched and rippled inward. The
sexual parts are all yellow. Pod tubular, curved, in 4 sections, drying to release many tiny seeds.
HABITAT: Well-drained, disturbed soil in full sun, espe-
cially sand and gravel. Common on roadsides and steep
field edges. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender leafy stem tips in spring or early sum-
mer should be cooked to reduce the slightly irritating qual-
ity. Flowers and flower buds can be collected from spring
through summer, sometimes later. I have not eaten the
root of this species. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Unlike its taller cousin, this species' flow-
ers are open all day, not just revealing themselves in the
evening. On road shoulders, mowing has selected to favor
more prostrate growth forms, but in more natural habitats it
is sometimes thigh high. You'll probably never eat a bunch of
this plant, but the flowers are an abundant and easy nibble.
396
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY 18 Cut-leaf evening primrose 1 2 2 Oenothera laciniata family Onagraceae CHECK: Creeping to spreading with many lobed but not toothed difficulty leaves; 1. veins flat QUICK above; large yellow 4-petal flowers at the end of a long tube. ID Biennial, the rosette persisting at least to early flowering. Basal leaves entire ellip- but DESCRIPTION: outline, slightly to moderately soft-hairy, 2-6" (5-15 cm) long, sometimes than wide, similar usually in length, ruffled-wavy, blunt-tipped, entire or with a few blunt teeth. portion Midvein of the leaf is tic in deeply pinnately lobed with up to 6 lobes per side, the lobes longer The distal often unlobed; the tip is blunt or rounded. The base of the blade tapers along the upper petiole. of blade off- set by light color, flat above; secondary veins are flat or faintly raised above. Petioles 40-70% length, solid, flat-topped with a keel below, wider than deep, with short, soft hairs on both sides, only winged distally. Stems multiple; the central ones may be erect but the outer ones are leaning, prostrate, or decumbent, to 30" (75 cm) long and 7 mm thick, solid, unbranched or with a few major branches, roundish in cross section, covered with soft hairs. Stem leaves 1-4" (2.5-10 cm) long, shorter distally, sessile except for the lowest ones, com- monly in offset pairs on the lower stem but the upper leaves are clearly alternate. Blades elliptic to lanceolate, the major veins whitish and flat above, protruding slightly but flat-bottomed below; lobes tend to be shorter on stem leaves, sometimes reduced to large teeth. Flowers (spring and summer) borne singly from leaf axils along the distal stems, appearing to have long hairy pedicels. (The "fake pedicel" consists of a long, striped, cylindric ovary that later becomes the fruit, and an elongated calyx tube of differing color and texture.) At the end of the tube are 4 hairy triangular lobes 7-13 mm long, folded back away from the flower. Corolla spreads 0.9-1.5" (23-38 mm) wide with 4 broad yellow petals (fading to orange), each notched and rippled inward. The sexual parts are all yellow. Pod tubular, curved, in 4 sections, drying to release many tiny seeds. HABITAT: Well-drained, disturbed soil in full sun, espe- cially sand and gravel. Common on roadsides and steep field edges. Native. FOOD USE: Tender leafy stem tips in spring or early sum- mer should be cooked to reduce the slightly irritating qual- ity. Flowers and flower buds can be collected from spring through summer, sometimes later. I have not eaten the root of this species. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Unlike its taller cousin, this species' flow- ers are open all day, not just revealing themselves in the evening. On road shoulders, mowing has selected to favor more prostrate growth forms, but in more natural habitats it is sometimes thigh high. You'll probably never eat a bunch of this plant, but the flowers are an abundant and easy nibble. 396 