BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
21 Creeping yellowcress
2
Rorippa sylvestris Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
UICK CHECK: Small, low rosettes of pinnately divided leaves Forming
apping lawn cover, mostly in flood-prone areas. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by short lateral rhizomes, forming dense colonies
of numerous adjacent and partly overlapping rosettes, these often raised slightly by short
vertical rhizomes. Basal leaves 5-8" (13-20 cm) long, deeply pinnately divided, the divisions
narrowed at the base (some leaves appearing almost compound with sessile leaflets)
The lowest divisions are often long-elliptic, tiny, and widely spaced. Upper divisions are more crowded DD
to 1.2" (3 cm) long, lanceolate, with deep and erratic pinnate lobes that are blunt-pointed with light-colored
nipple-tips. Minute hairs are sometimes found on the lower part of the rachis; otherwise all surfaces are
hairless. Midrib deeply D-shaped, not channeled (flat or slightly convex above), naked in the lower 20-40%.
winged its entire length, but the wing narrower toward the base. Stems wavy or zigzag, 5-14" (13-36 tall.
slightly angled in cross-section, faintly hairy. Stem leaves much smaller, with the lower portion of the petiole
naked but faintly winged, the base not clasping. Inflorescence small crowded racemes, the pedicels 6-9 mm,
ascending. Flowers 3-7 mm across with 4 yellow petals. Pods angled toward the raceme tip, to 14 mm long,
1-2 mm wide, cylindrical, usually seedless.
HABITAT: Moist, low, flat ground, especially flood-prone sites with rich alluvial soil, in full sun to partial shade
Abundant along many major river systems in parks and lawns, and occasionally in disturbed forests. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Tender greens are good raw or cooked and remain available into late fall or early winter
COMMENTS: This is one of our mildest
mustards, but unfortunately the leaves
are often coated in mud after floods If
you get a mouthful of leaves you may
notice a hint of strawberry. (l thought
this was my imagination the first five
times I ate it.)
199
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY 21 Creeping yellowcress 2 Rorippa sylvestris Brassicaceae (Mustard family) UICK CHECK: Small, low rosettes of pinnately divided leaves Forming apping lawn cover, mostly in flood-prone areas. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by short lateral rhizomes, forming dense colonies of numerous adjacent and partly overlapping rosettes, these often raised slightly by short vertical rhizomes. Basal leaves 5-8" (13-20 cm) long, deeply pinnately divided, the divisions narrowed at the base (some leaves appearing almost compound with sessile leaflets) The lowest divisions are often long-elliptic, tiny, and widely spaced. Upper divisions are more crowded DD to 1.2" (3 cm) long, lanceolate, with deep and erratic pinnate lobes that are blunt-pointed with light-colored nipple-tips. Minute hairs are sometimes found on the lower part of the rachis; otherwise all surfaces are hairless. Midrib deeply D-shaped, not channeled (flat or slightly convex above), naked in the lower 20-40%. winged its entire length, but the wing narrower toward the base. Stems wavy or zigzag, 5-14" (13-36 tall. slightly angled in cross-section, faintly hairy. Stem leaves much smaller, with the lower portion of the petiole naked but faintly winged, the base not clasping. Inflorescence small crowded racemes, the pedicels 6-9 mm, ascending. Flowers 3-7 mm across with 4 yellow petals. Pods angled toward the raceme tip, to 14 mm long, 1-2 mm wide, cylindrical, usually seedless. HABITAT: Moist, low, flat ground, especially flood-prone sites with rich alluvial soil, in full sun to partial shade Abundant along many major river systems in parks and lawns, and occasionally in disturbed forests. Introduced. FOOD USE: Tender greens are good raw or cooked and remain available into late fall or early winter COMMENTS: This is one of our mildest mustards, but unfortunately the leaves are often coated in mud after floods If you get a mouthful of leaves you may notice a hint of strawberry. (l thought this was my imagination the first five times I ate it.) 199 