LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE,
LOBED BASAL OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT
2
20 Marsh
Rorippa yellowcress palustris Brassicaceae 2 (Mustard family)
QUICK CHECK: Basal leaves with numerous deep lobes, flowers tiny and yellow, pods
short and stout ID difficulty 2. the rosettes persisting through flowering. nearly Basal
DESCRIPTION: Annual or winter annual, pinnately lobed starting at the base or The
with lobes 50. leaves Sinuses scattered, are numerous, evenly extend tiny spaced 3-10" almost whitish (8-25 and to gradually the nipple-tipped cm) midvein, long, to larger deeply rounded which teeth, toward has below, the at the surfaces least usually tip, a widest thin hairless with wing at scattered along the or finely base, all parts. hairy. hair pointed, on
Midvein both sides. flat to Veins slightly are
protruding above protruding above and protruding below. Stems 1-4' (30-120 finely hairy,
and widely keeled cm)
flat to slightly multiple per crown, zigzag, angled, hollow, hairless or the overall
unbranched tall, usually at first but with small ascending branches at flowering, tend to
lean shape strongly or spread, especially in full sun. Stem leaves strongly
taller than wide. Center stem is erect; if multiple, the outer stems ascending,
less deeply lobed than the lower ones, and less neatly pinnate; they are usu- leaf
ally clasping with auricles. Inflorescence racemes, terminal and in upper
axils. Flowers tiny, yellow, 2 mm wide, with 4 elliptic petals. Pods 3-6 mm long,
cylindrical, beaked, often slightly curved and oriented toward the tip, borne on
pedicels 3-6 mm long, about 90° to the rachis.
HABITAT: Margins of waterways and wetlands in full to partial sun, preferring
mucky soil. Also in wet roadsides and trails, dried up ponds or puddles in late
summer, and moist agricultural fields. Occasionally in random, disturbed, dry
places. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather the leaves and shoots and use them raw or cooked. Makes
a good vegetable steamed like broccoli. The best time to collect this plant is
in spring, but occasionally the greens are tender in summer, and it sometimes
germinates in late fall where ponds dry up. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This common native mustard has a good, mild flavor but is largely
overlooked. It is often found in wild areas and natural habitats where other
weedy mustards are usually absent. All members of the genus Rorippa are edible.
398
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE, LOBED BASAL OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT 2 20 Marsh Rorippa yellowcress palustris Brassicaceae 2 (Mustard family) QUICK CHECK: Basal leaves with numerous deep lobes, flowers tiny and yellow, pods short and stout ID difficulty 2. the rosettes persisting through flowering. nearly Basal DESCRIPTION: Annual or winter annual, pinnately lobed starting at the base or The with lobes 50. leaves Sinuses scattered, are numerous, evenly extend tiny spaced 3-10" almost whitish (8-25 and to gradually the nipple-tipped cm) midvein, long, to larger deeply rounded which teeth, toward has below, the at the surfaces least usually tip, a widest thin hairless with wing at scattered along the or finely base, all parts. hairy. hair pointed, on Midvein both sides. flat to Veins slightly are protruding above protruding above and protruding below. Stems 1-4' (30-120 finely hairy, and widely keeled cm) flat to slightly multiple per crown, zigzag, angled, hollow, hairless or the overall unbranched tall, usually at first but with small ascending branches at flowering, tend to lean shape strongly or spread, especially in full sun. Stem leaves strongly taller than wide. Center stem is erect; if multiple, the outer stems ascending, less deeply lobed than the lower ones, and less neatly pinnate; they are usu- leaf ally clasping with auricles. Inflorescence racemes, terminal and in upper axils. Flowers tiny, yellow, 2 mm wide, with 4 elliptic petals. Pods 3-6 mm long, cylindrical, beaked, often slightly curved and oriented toward the tip, borne on pedicels 3-6 mm long, about 90° to the rachis. HABITAT: Margins of waterways and wetlands in full to partial sun, preferring mucky soil. Also in wet roadsides and trails, dried up ponds or puddles in late summer, and moist agricultural fields. Occasionally in random, disturbed, dry places. Native. FOOD USE: Gather the leaves and shoots and use them raw or cooked. Makes a good vegetable steamed like broccoli. The best time to collect this plant is in spring, but occasionally the greens are tender in summer, and it sometimes germinates in late fall where ponds dry up. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This common native mustard has a good, mild flavor but is largely overlooked. It is often found in wild areas and natural habitats where other weedy mustards are usually absent. All members of the genus Rorippa are edible. 398 