mm
0
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
COMMENTS: Like beer, wintercress has a strong flavor and is an acquired taste. People who have long eaten
it crave it. Many botanists separate the native North American populations into a separate species B. ortho-
ceras, but nobody seems able to explain clear or consistent differences between them. I think the distinction
lies somewhere between insignificant and bogus. AKA yellow rocket.
Related edible:
23 Southern wintercress
Barbarea verna
3
3
3
A smaller plant with a rosette that persists through blooming. Basal leaves are pinnately
divided with 15-23 lobes (plus mini-lobes between them), crowded and getting progres-
sively larger toward the tip. The side lobes or divisions are about twice as long as wide,
blunt with scattered nipple-teeth, 20-40% as large as the terminal lobe. Midribs have
hairs along the channel and near the base. Stems multiple, branched, even more angled
than common wintercress, often nearly triangular. The flowering and fruiting parts are
similar but smaller. ID difficulty 2.
rich soil (less moist and mucky, on average, than common wintercress, Introduced. but they
HABITAT: sometimes occur Disturbed, together). This plant largely replaces common wintercress in the Southeast. tastes
FOOD USE: The flavor is hotter than that of common wintercress, but lacks the bitter nearly overtone-it identical to
watercress. Cook-
ing greatly reduces
the hotness.
COMMENTS: This
is a popular wild
green and is grown
commercially to a
Innited extent. It is
sometimes differ-
entiated from win-
tercress by calling
it 'early or "spring
wintercress-names
whichare contradic-
tory since winter is
earlier than spring
It is also called
creasy greens.
401
mm 0 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY COMMENTS: Like beer, wintercress has a strong flavor and is an acquired taste. People who have long eaten it crave it. Many botanists separate the native North American populations into a separate species B. ortho- ceras, but nobody seems able to explain clear or consistent differences between them. I think the distinction lies somewhere between insignificant and bogus. AKA yellow rocket. Related edible: 23 Southern wintercress Barbarea verna 3 3 3 A smaller plant with a rosette that persists through blooming. Basal leaves are pinnately divided with 15-23 lobes (plus mini-lobes between them), crowded and getting progres- sively larger toward the tip. The side lobes or divisions are about twice as long as wide, blunt with scattered nipple-teeth, 20-40% as large as the terminal lobe. Midribs have hairs along the channel and near the base. Stems multiple, branched, even more angled than common wintercress, often nearly triangular. The flowering and fruiting parts are similar but smaller. ID difficulty 2. rich soil (less moist and mucky, on average, than common wintercress, Introduced. but they HABITAT: sometimes occur Disturbed, together). This plant largely replaces common wintercress in the Southeast. tastes FOOD USE: The flavor is hotter than that of common wintercress, but lacks the bitter nearly overtone-it identical to watercress. Cook- ing greatly reduces the hotness. COMMENTS: This is a popular wild green and is grown commercially to a Innited extent. It is sometimes differ- entiated from win- tercress by calling it 'early or "spring wintercress-names whichare contradic- tory since winter is earlier than spring It is also called creasy greens. 401 