LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE,
BASAL LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT
IWE-423
22
Wintercress Barbarea vulgaris 2 . Brassicaceae 2 (Mustard family)
Rosette leaves pinnately divided, hairless, flowers with a large, in spring. blunt ID terminal difficulty divi- 3.
QUICK CHECK: smaller side divisions; stem angular; yellow (10-23 cm)
sion and mus biennial. Basal leaves in a rosette, 4-9" both surfaces
DESCRIPTION: and (5-8 Winter cm) wide, annual pinnately or lobed or divided it with is blunt 3-9 lobes, and ovate to rotund,
long 2-3" most of the blade; at the vein
usually are small and blunt, one pair very close to the not at all. Midrib rest well-spaced; long and hairless some
hairless. with The 2 terminal curled, ear-like lobe composes sections at the base, the margins terminal with light lobe spots but the
tips. Side lobes stalk-like base. Major veins depressed faintly, veinlets keeled beneath. Basal leaves are
have a narrowed, shallow channel edged distally with a thin leafy wing, bluntly mm) thick, solid or with a tiny
with a broad, flowering. Stems multiple, to 3' (1 m) tall and 0.7" (18 ascending simple branches
wilting but present at angled and grooved in an asymmetric fashion, hairless, with than basal leaves.
hollow, green, half. strongly Stem leaves clasping, flared at the base with 2 ear-like lobes, shorter hairs the plant.
in the have upper a few long hairs on the rachis wings, especially near the base-these are the only with the inflorescence, on
They terminal divisions are narrower and often lobed. Uppermost leaves, associated naked for
have The large, blunt teeth. Inflorescence terminal and axillary racemes, the peduncles long and 3-9"
(8-23 cm). Flower buds green with yellow, spiky tips. Flowers (late spring) have 4 bright yellow petals, 1 cm
across when open, maturing into long, narrow seedpods.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Often confused with watercress (p. 212) because of the name. Watercress has com-
pound leaves with more and larger lateral leaflets, hollow stems, white flowers, no basal rosette, and is aquatic.
Butterweed Packera glabella grows in similar habitats and resembles wintercress in spring before flowering.
It can be told apart by teeth on the lobes or divisions, more lobes per leaf, and the fact that the uppermost
leaves are pinnately divided (they are only lobed in wintercress). A silvery sheen follows butterweed veins
on the upper surface; the stems have a large hollow and bright purple ridges.
HABITAT: Moist, disturbed ground, in full to partial sun. Agricultural fields, gardens, yards, parks, roadsides,
riverbanks, lakeshores, dried puddles, construction sites, meadows, trails through low woods. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather the shoots and tops while still meristematic in early to mid spring, when flower buds are
visible but have yet to open; use like a strong-flavored broccoli. Basal leaves are best collected in late autumn,
winter, or very early spring, when their flavor is mildest. Conservation 1.
Batter mised weed Packera glabella may be
with either species of wintercress. con-
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE, BASAL LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT IWE-423 22 Wintercress Barbarea vulgaris 2 . Brassicaceae 2 (Mustard family) Rosette leaves pinnately divided, hairless, flowers with a large, in spring. blunt ID terminal difficulty divi- 3. QUICK CHECK: smaller side divisions; stem angular; yellow (10-23 cm) sion and mus biennial. Basal leaves in a rosette, 4-9" both surfaces DESCRIPTION: and (5-8 Winter cm) wide, annual pinnately or lobed or divided it with is blunt 3-9 lobes, and ovate to rotund, long 2-3" most of the blade; at the vein usually are small and blunt, one pair very close to the not at all. Midrib rest well-spaced; long and hairless some hairless. with The 2 terminal curled, ear-like lobe composes sections at the base, the margins terminal with light lobe spots but the tips. Side lobes stalk-like base. Major veins depressed faintly, veinlets keeled beneath. Basal leaves are have a narrowed, shallow channel edged distally with a thin leafy wing, bluntly mm) thick, solid or with a tiny with a broad, flowering. Stems multiple, to 3' (1 m) tall and 0.7" (18 ascending simple branches wilting but present at angled and grooved in an asymmetric fashion, hairless, with than basal leaves. hollow, green, half. strongly Stem leaves clasping, flared at the base with 2 ear-like lobes, shorter hairs the plant. in the have upper a few long hairs on the rachis wings, especially near the base-these are the only with the inflorescence, on They terminal divisions are narrower and often lobed. Uppermost leaves, associated naked for have The large, blunt teeth. Inflorescence terminal and axillary racemes, the peduncles long and 3-9" (8-23 cm). Flower buds green with yellow, spiky tips. Flowers (late spring) have 4 bright yellow petals, 1 cm across when open, maturing into long, narrow seedpods. CONFUSING PLANTS: Often confused with watercress (p. 212) because of the name. Watercress has com- pound leaves with more and larger lateral leaflets, hollow stems, white flowers, no basal rosette, and is aquatic. Butterweed Packera glabella grows in similar habitats and resembles wintercress in spring before flowering. It can be told apart by teeth on the lobes or divisions, more lobes per leaf, and the fact that the uppermost leaves are pinnately divided (they are only lobed in wintercress). A silvery sheen follows butterweed veins on the upper surface; the stems have a large hollow and bright purple ridges. HABITAT: Moist, disturbed ground, in full to partial sun. Agricultural fields, gardens, yards, parks, roadsides, riverbanks, lakeshores, dried puddles, construction sites, meadows, trails through low woods. Native. FOOD USE: Gather the shoots and tops while still meristematic in early to mid spring, when flower buds are visible but have yet to open; use like a strong-flavored broccoli. Basal leaves are best collected in late autumn, winter, or very early spring, when their flavor is mildest. Conservation 1. Batter mised weed Packera glabella may be with either species of wintercress. con- 