BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
24 Blue mustard
Chorispora tenella 3 Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
QUICK CHECK: Small, sticky-haired mustard with lanceolate, sparsely-toothed 1. leaves
and loose racemes of light blue flowers with 4 petals. ID difficulty
DESCRIPTION: Annual or winter annual. Basal leaves to 6" (15 cm) long, often both persisting ends,
and to early be toothed or deeply pinnately lobed-if lobed, there is usually a basal
flowering, especially on robust plants. They are long-elliptic, tapered to crimped-up
may between the lobes. Petioles shallowly channeled, 15-25% of blade length on
wing leaves, 5-12% on stem leaves. Stems erect to spreading or prostrate, sometimes branched from the base,
3-22" (8-56 cm) tall and 3-13 mm thick, round, hollow on large specimens, covered with gland-tipped hairs
and scattered needle-hairs. Branches prominent, strongly ascending in competition, wide-spreading in full
sun. Stem leaves progressively shorter toward the top; they are erratically alternate, sometimes 2 on one
side, the first two on each branch borne close together in an offset pair. Under full sun and moisture stress, leaves
point vertically and twist to optimize sun exposure, so that all leaves on each branch are in plane. The surface has
gland-tipped hairs and bumps or spots on both sides. Midvein nearly flat above and light in color. Second-
ary veins depressed slightly or not at all. Margins sparsely but almost regularly toothed, the points sharp,
often purple, oriented outward. Inflorescence a sparse terminal raceme, the pedicels ascending and slightly
shorter than the flower. Flowers (spring) have an elongated, narrow base with 4 purplish sepals. The 4 nar-
row, blue-purple petals are darker and wavy or crimped at the base, wider toward their rounded tips, and
spread 9-12 mm. Pods 1.2-1.8" (3-4.6 cm) long, rounded in cross section, thin, hairy, curved, ascending, with
a long, thin, tapering, needle-like tip. The short, stout pedicel widens to meet the pod's base. At maturity the
pods break into 2-seeded sections.
HABITAT: Sunny, well-drained, disturbed soil, especially sandy; likes fallow crop fields, roadsides, construc-
tion sites, and vacant lots. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Young, tender stems and leaves can be eaten raw or cooked. They are moderately radishy-hot.
Individual leaves often remain tender well into flowering when stems have toughened. Beware: The sticky
hairs can hold wind-blown soil.
COMMENTS: This mustard has a distinct, unique flavor that is odd and unforgettable but pleasant and
slightly sweet. It is short, blooms at the same time as henbit, has flowers of similar color, and the two are often
intermingled. You might be overlooking it. AKA musk mustard, purple mustard, crossflower.
402
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY 24 Blue mustard Chorispora tenella 3 Brassicaceae (Mustard family) QUICK CHECK: Small, sticky-haired mustard with lanceolate, sparsely-toothed 1. leaves and loose racemes of light blue flowers with 4 petals. ID difficulty DESCRIPTION: Annual or winter annual. Basal leaves to 6" (15 cm) long, often both persisting ends, and to early be toothed or deeply pinnately lobed-if lobed, there is usually a basal flowering, especially on robust plants. They are long-elliptic, tapered to crimped-up may between the lobes. Petioles shallowly channeled, 15-25% of blade length on wing leaves, 5-12% on stem leaves. Stems erect to spreading or prostrate, sometimes branched from the base, 3-22" (8-56 cm) tall and 3-13 mm thick, round, hollow on large specimens, covered with gland-tipped hairs and scattered needle-hairs. Branches prominent, strongly ascending in competition, wide-spreading in full sun. Stem leaves progressively shorter toward the top; they are erratically alternate, sometimes 2 on one side, the first two on each branch borne close together in an offset pair. Under full sun and moisture stress, leaves point vertically and twist to optimize sun exposure, so that all leaves on each branch are in plane. The surface has gland-tipped hairs and bumps or spots on both sides. Midvein nearly flat above and light in color. Second- ary veins depressed slightly or not at all. Margins sparsely but almost regularly toothed, the points sharp, often purple, oriented outward. Inflorescence a sparse terminal raceme, the pedicels ascending and slightly shorter than the flower. Flowers (spring) have an elongated, narrow base with 4 purplish sepals. The 4 nar- row, blue-purple petals are darker and wavy or crimped at the base, wider toward their rounded tips, and spread 9-12 mm. Pods 1.2-1.8" (3-4.6 cm) long, rounded in cross section, thin, hairy, curved, ascending, with a long, thin, tapering, needle-like tip. The short, stout pedicel widens to meet the pod's base. At maturity the pods break into 2-seeded sections. HABITAT: Sunny, well-drained, disturbed soil, especially sandy; likes fallow crop fields, roadsides, construc- tion sites, and vacant lots. Introduced. FOOD USE: Young, tender stems and leaves can be eaten raw or cooked. They are moderately radishy-hot. Individual leaves often remain tender well into flowering when stems have toughened. Beware: The sticky hairs can hold wind-blown soil. COMMENTS: This mustard has a distinct, unique flavor that is odd and unforgettable but pleasant and slightly sweet. It is short, blooms at the same time as henbit, has flowers of similar color, and the two are often intermingled. You might be overlooking it. AKA musk mustard, purple mustard, crossflower. 402 