Mustard
BASAL LEAVES LOBED PRESENT, LEAVES
OR DIVIDED, SAP ALTERNATE, NOT MILKY
25 Shepherd's purse
2
3
Capsella bursa-pastoris
3
IWF
339
Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
(iny flowers and triangular seedpods. ID difficulty 2.
UICK white CHECK: Dense rosette of dandelion like leaves, stora From
DESCRIPTION: long and about Annual or more commonly winter annual. Basal leaves
pinnate, lanceolate may stand erect where growing in competition. There are hugging the ground.
although they a third as wide, in a dense rosette of 12-28, often 3-8" m)
hairs on both to triangular lobes per side. The blade and midvein 5-9 have deep, crowded,
has light sides. Midrib flat-topped and slightly protruding above, rounded long, leaning
lobe a is faintly green, sinew-like fiber inside, visible when the leaf is pulled apart. The or major very gently keeled below:
abruptly depressed above; smaller veins are flat and obscure. Lobe margins have secondary vain in each
to leaning, pointed teeth and scattered hairs. Petioles about 10% of blade length. Stems a) often few broad, shallow.
above the to 27" (70 cm) tall, 3-11 mm thick, zigzag, branching sparsely at wide angles. multiple, erect
with lower quarter of the plant, solid, sometimes maroon, slightly angled in cross section. bearing the few leaves
scattered leaning hairs and clumps of very fine wool (especially as shoots) Stem leaves surface
much smaller than the basal, reduced toward the top, with 2 long-pointed, clasping lobes at the base. alternate. The blade
tapers to a long point, with scattered teeth or small lobes. Uppermost leaves are linear, deeply folded, and entire.
Inflorescence multiple terminal racemes up to 16" (40 cm) long; inflorescence about half the plant's height,
leafless, the pedicels several times the flower length. Flowers (any time but mostly spring through early sum-
mer) tiny with 4 white petals and tiny green sepals about as long, the petals not spreading open, blooming
a small tuft at the raceme's end. Pod triangular to slightly heart-shaped, attached at the point of the heart,
with a line down the middle, on a pedicel twice the pod's length.
HABITAT: Disturbed ground in rich, drained soil; gardens, yards, construction sites. crop fields. Usuaily
reported as introduced but I have seen no evidence presented-it's probably native.
FOOD USE: Roots are good, but usually small and fiddly to clean. Gather robust, tender leaves mostly in
spring and fall in the North, winter in the South. They can be eaten raw in salads or cooked as a botherb.
Shoots are available primarily in winter (South) or spring (North). The flavor is good raw and superb cocked.
COMMENTS: Supposedly the seedpods resemble purses that shepherds carry. It's been a while since I've
seen that. This is my favorite mustard. The tender young stems are one of the world's finest vegetables. Young
leaves are very good, too-especially when they stand erect on rich soil. When old and tough and easy to
spot, this plant is not good eating. Reports that the root can be used as a seasoning like ginger are based on
inattentive copying of information (see Kallas 2010) and should be ignored.
403
Mustard BASAL LEAVES LOBED PRESENT, LEAVES OR DIVIDED, SAP ALTERNATE, NOT MILKY 25 Shepherd's purse 2 3 Capsella bursa-pastoris 3 IWF 339 Brassicaceae (Mustard family) (iny flowers and triangular seedpods. ID difficulty 2. UICK white CHECK: Dense rosette of dandelion like leaves, stora From DESCRIPTION: long and about Annual or more commonly winter annual. Basal leaves pinnate, lanceolate may stand erect where growing in competition. There are hugging the ground. although they a third as wide, in a dense rosette of 12-28, often 3-8" m) hairs on both to triangular lobes per side. The blade and midvein 5-9 have deep, crowded, has light sides. Midrib flat-topped and slightly protruding above, rounded long, leaning lobe a is faintly green, sinew-like fiber inside, visible when the leaf is pulled apart. The or major very gently keeled below: abruptly depressed above; smaller veins are flat and obscure. Lobe margins have secondary vain in each to leaning, pointed teeth and scattered hairs. Petioles about 10% of blade length. Stems a) often few broad, shallow. above the to 27" (70 cm) tall, 3-11 mm thick, zigzag, branching sparsely at wide angles. multiple, erect with lower quarter of the plant, solid, sometimes maroon, slightly angled in cross section. bearing the few leaves scattered leaning hairs and clumps of very fine wool (especially as shoots) Stem leaves surface much smaller than the basal, reduced toward the top, with 2 long-pointed, clasping lobes at the base. alternate. The blade tapers to a long point, with scattered teeth or small lobes. Uppermost leaves are linear, deeply folded, and entire. Inflorescence multiple terminal racemes up to 16" (40 cm) long; inflorescence about half the plant's height, leafless, the pedicels several times the flower length. Flowers (any time but mostly spring through early sum- mer) tiny with 4 white petals and tiny green sepals about as long, the petals not spreading open, blooming a small tuft at the raceme's end. Pod triangular to slightly heart-shaped, attached at the point of the heart, with a line down the middle, on a pedicel twice the pod's length. HABITAT: Disturbed ground in rich, drained soil; gardens, yards, construction sites. crop fields. Usuaily reported as introduced but I have seen no evidence presented-it's probably native. FOOD USE: Roots are good, but usually small and fiddly to clean. Gather robust, tender leaves mostly in spring and fall in the North, winter in the South. They can be eaten raw in salads or cooked as a botherb. Shoots are available primarily in winter (South) or spring (North). The flavor is good raw and superb cocked. COMMENTS: Supposedly the seedpods resemble purses that shepherds carry. It's been a while since I've seen that. This is my favorite mustard. The tender young stems are one of the world's finest vegetables. Young leaves are very good, too-especially when they stand erect on rich soil. When old and tough and easy to spot, this plant is not good eating. Reports that the root can be used as a seasoning like ginger are based on inattentive copying of information (see Kallas 2010) and should be ignored. 403 