BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
26 Field pepperweed
Lepidium campestre Brassicaceae 2 (Mustard family)
QUICK CHECK: Small, lobed basal leaves and clasping, entire stem leaves; all parts
hairy; tiny disc-like seed pods with a notched tip. ID difficulty 1.
Winter annual, the leaves and stems densely covered with short, 1.5-4" stiff
DESCRIPTION: the whole plant a grayish look. Basal leaves and lowest stem leaves or pinnately
hairs, giving cm) on short petioles, lanceolate to elliptic in outline, toothed above and
lobed mostly below; in the secondary veins are flat above. Stems single or multiple, erect, 10-24" (25-60 ascending. cm) tal S
(4-10 long, proximal part, withering by flowering. Midvein depressed
protruding thick, tough, roundish but finely ridged. Branches mostly in the upper half, simple, base, crowded
leaves 3-5 mm alternate, 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long, sessile, becoming shorter and clasping with a lobed
overlapping, lanceolate, the blades cupped downward. Margins may be entire but more often have spa
small, nipple-like, light-tipped teeth. Inflorescence dense terminal racemes up to 9" (23 cm) long. Flowers
inconspicuous, with barely visible (sometimes absent) petals, obovate to elliptic, widely separated, whi
pinkish. Pod circular to heart-shaped, about 3 mm across, divided in half by a prominent suture line, cup
upward, winged on the edges, notched at the tip, on a pedicel slightly longer than its diameter.
HABITAT: Disturbed soil such as gardens, crop fields, sidewalk cracks, vacant lots, construction sites,
shoulders. Introduced.
FOOD USE: The young leaves and stem tips can
be collected while tender and eaten raw or cooked
(they're better cooked). The flavor is moderately
strong. The seedpods and seeds have a hot, pep-
pery flavor. You can use them when just formed, or
when mature.
COMMENTS: This mustard has good flavor and in
some areas is a prevalent agricultural weed. Unfor-
tunately the plant is inconspicuous in its ideal eating
stage.
494
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY 26 Field pepperweed Lepidium campestre Brassicaceae 2 (Mustard family) QUICK CHECK: Small, lobed basal leaves and clasping, entire stem leaves; all parts hairy; tiny disc-like seed pods with a notched tip. ID difficulty 1. Winter annual, the leaves and stems densely covered with short, 1.5-4" stiff DESCRIPTION: the whole plant a grayish look. Basal leaves and lowest stem leaves or pinnately hairs, giving cm) on short petioles, lanceolate to elliptic in outline, toothed above and lobed mostly below; in the secondary veins are flat above. Stems single or multiple, erect, 10-24" (25-60 ascending. cm) tal S (4-10 long, proximal part, withering by flowering. Midvein depressed protruding thick, tough, roundish but finely ridged. Branches mostly in the upper half, simple, base, crowded leaves 3-5 mm alternate, 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long, sessile, becoming shorter and clasping with a lobed overlapping, lanceolate, the blades cupped downward. Margins may be entire but more often have spa small, nipple-like, light-tipped teeth. Inflorescence dense terminal racemes up to 9" (23 cm) long. Flowers inconspicuous, with barely visible (sometimes absent) petals, obovate to elliptic, widely separated, whi pinkish. Pod circular to heart-shaped, about 3 mm across, divided in half by a prominent suture line, cup upward, winged on the edges, notched at the tip, on a pedicel slightly longer than its diameter. HABITAT: Disturbed soil such as gardens, crop fields, sidewalk cracks, vacant lots, construction sites, shoulders. Introduced. FOOD USE: The young leaves and stem tips can be collected while tender and eaten raw or cooked (they're better cooked). The flavor is moderately strong. The seedpods and seeds have a hot, pep- pery flavor. You can use them when just formed, or when mature. COMMENTS: This mustard has good flavor and in some areas is a prevalent agricultural weed. Unfor- tunately the plant is inconspicuous in its ideal eating stage. 494 