mm
cm
BASAL LEAVES LOBED PRESENT, LEAVES
OR DIVIDED, SAP ALTERNATE, NOT MILKY
27 Common pepperweed
Lepidium virginicum and L. densiflorum 2 3 Brassicaceae
(Mustard family)
spreading UICK CHECK: top with Shin-high plant with crowded, pinnately lobed basal leaves
numerous racemes, tiny flowers, and disc-like pods. ID and difficulty a broad.
DESCRIPTION: leaves Annual or winter annual, at first with a dense basal 2.
forward-pointing numerous, the blade tapering from a narrow base, widest at the rosette. Basal
distal sinuses lobes. Sinuses may be deep near the leaf base with fully tip, with several
tip. Veins all get shallower. Blades minutely hairy on both sides, the hairs leaning divided sections;
edges. Stems flat often above. Petioles roughly equal to the blade, triangular in cross toward section the with
stem to 26" (66 multiple (or branched at the base), the side stems leaning strongly, slightly opturned
smooth, with cm) tall, with wide-spreading branches. Stem roundish but gently angled, with a solid dominant when central
lanceolate green, very fine hairs (may not be visible to the naked eye). Stem leaves alternate, young.
with to narrowly elliptic, tapered to the base, sessile or nearly so, much overlapped. densely packed,
small, narrow, tooth-like lobes. Leaves wither at flowering, starting with the rosette and shallowly working lohed
stem; mature fruiting stems are leafless. Inflorescence widely branching, composed of numerous up the
spreading and then curving upward, not all attaining the same height. The tip of the inflorescence is racemes a dense,
flat-topped cluster of buds. Flowers (late spring to early summer) are tiny, with 4 white petals (often absent).
Pods flat, round or broadly elliptic, notched at the tip with a line down the center.
Species: L. densiflorum is shorter, often bushy and wider than tall, especially in the open where decumbent
branches give it a tumbleweed form. The flower petals are tiny or absent. L. virginicum is usually slightly taller
than wide and is less branchy, and the flowers normally
have petals.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Ox-eye daisy leaves (also edible.
p. 395) are glossier, darker, and thicker
HABITAT: Dry, disturbed soil; roadsides, yards, side-
walk cracks, vacant lots, railroads, edges of parking lots,
beaches, crop fields, construction sites. Native.
FOOD USE: The tender leaves and leafy shoots can be
eaten cooked or raw in late spring; they are mild to average
among mustards as far as hotness. The tender tip of each
growing inflorescence (about half an inch) can be used as
a hot seasoning. Mature seed pods can be gathered and
ground as "pepper" but are not as peppery as the flower
buds. Conserva-
tion 1.
COMMENTS:
This is a common
weed that every-
one has seen,
even in the larg-
est urban areas.
It is distinct at
maturity, but
harder to recog-
nize early in the
season when it is
best for eating.
The two species
covered here are
nearly identical
when young.
Lepidium virginicum flowering.
405
(left top and bottom) L. densiflorum.
mm cm BASAL LEAVES LOBED PRESENT, LEAVES OR DIVIDED, SAP ALTERNATE, NOT MILKY 27 Common pepperweed Lepidium virginicum and L. densiflorum 2 3 Brassicaceae (Mustard family) spreading UICK CHECK: top with Shin-high plant with crowded, pinnately lobed basal leaves numerous racemes, tiny flowers, and disc-like pods. ID and difficulty a broad. DESCRIPTION: leaves Annual or winter annual, at first with a dense basal 2. forward-pointing numerous, the blade tapering from a narrow base, widest at the rosette. Basal distal sinuses lobes. Sinuses may be deep near the leaf base with fully tip, with several tip. Veins all get shallower. Blades minutely hairy on both sides, the hairs leaning divided sections; edges. Stems flat often above. Petioles roughly equal to the blade, triangular in cross toward section the with stem to 26" (66 multiple (or branched at the base), the side stems leaning strongly, slightly opturned smooth, with cm) tall, with wide-spreading branches. Stem roundish but gently angled, with a solid dominant when central lanceolate green, very fine hairs (may not be visible to the naked eye). Stem leaves alternate, young. with to narrowly elliptic, tapered to the base, sessile or nearly so, much overlapped. densely packed, small, narrow, tooth-like lobes. Leaves wither at flowering, starting with the rosette and shallowly working lohed stem; mature fruiting stems are leafless. Inflorescence widely branching, composed of numerous up the spreading and then curving upward, not all attaining the same height. The tip of the inflorescence is racemes a dense, flat-topped cluster of buds. Flowers (late spring to early summer) are tiny, with 4 white petals (often absent). Pods flat, round or broadly elliptic, notched at the tip with a line down the center. Species: L. densiflorum is shorter, often bushy and wider than tall, especially in the open where decumbent branches give it a tumbleweed form. The flower petals are tiny or absent. L. virginicum is usually slightly taller than wide and is less branchy, and the flowers normally have petals. CONFUSING PLANTS: Ox-eye daisy leaves (also edible. p. 395) are glossier, darker, and thicker HABITAT: Dry, disturbed soil; roadsides, yards, side- walk cracks, vacant lots, railroads, edges of parking lots, beaches, crop fields, construction sites. Native. FOOD USE: The tender leaves and leafy shoots can be eaten cooked or raw in late spring; they are mild to average among mustards as far as hotness. The tender tip of each growing inflorescence (about half an inch) can be used as a hot seasoning. Mature seed pods can be gathered and ground as "pepper" but are not as peppery as the flower buds. Conserva- tion 1. COMMENTS: This is a common weed that every- one has seen, even in the larg- est urban areas. It is distinct at maturity, but harder to recog- nize early in the season when it is best for eating. The two species covered here are nearly identical when young. Lepidium virginicum flowering. 405 (left top and bottom) L. densiflorum. 