LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
BASAL LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
3
28 mustard
Arabis Tower glabra Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
CHECK. Straight, unbranched mustard, all parts 1. pointing vertically; entire,
narrow. Basal leaves to 7" (18 cm) long and 1.2" (3 cm) nearly wide, to with the
QUICK clasping stem leaves, often purple. ID difficulty
DESCRIPTION: Winter annual. midrib, the sinuses between them wide and entire. cut The upper
midrib. especially on and flat veins. The midrib is hairy underneath. Stems hairless, solid,
pointed lobes 90° to proximal the lobes. The distal third of the blade may be single, 2-6'
surface has hairy bumps erect, straight, unbranched below the inflorescence, nodes. Stem leaves round, alternate, heavily coated 1-5
(60-180 cm) tall, strictly except for very faint ridges descending from the skyward and almost
with white bloom, smooth lowermost twice that long), spaced regularly up the stem, pointing round-tipped
(2.5-13 cm) lanceolate long (the or tapered to the pointed tip, broadest at the base, clasping with hairs 2 on narrow, the midvein below
appressed, The blades are hairless except that low to mid-stem leaves have a line of above,
Midvein lobes. in a deep valley, projecting below but not sharply keeled; other veins are flat and obscure giving the
leaf a very smooth surface. Lower leaves are purple
on the underside; those on young plants often
dark purple on both sides. Inflorescence branch-
ing but the branches almost pressed together,
all pointing up; multiple racemes to 24" (6c cm)
long, the flowers blooming in an elongated clus-
ter at the tip. Flowers 5-7 mm wide, the 4 elliptic
petals creamy to pale yellow, on short pedicels.
Pods to 3" (8 cm) long, rod-like and very narrow.
crowded, overlapping, and appressed.
HABITAT: Sandy fields, dry meadows, barrens,
and roadsides. Native.
FOOD USE: The shoots make a good vegetable
in spring; raw they are acceptable, but steamed
or briefly boiled they are excellent. Older growth
quickly becomes too tough to eat. Leaves may
remain tender even on flowering plants but are
usually strong and bit-
ter in flavor. Conserva-
tion 2.
COMMENTS: At
maturity this is one of
the easiest herbaceous
plants in our region to
recognize. The shoots
are not well known,
but excellent if you
can identify them at
that stage. AKA Tur-
ritis glabra
406
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, BASAL LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY 3 28 mustard Arabis Tower glabra Brassicaceae (Mustard family) CHECK. Straight, unbranched mustard, all parts 1. pointing vertically; entire, narrow. Basal leaves to 7" (18 cm) long and 1.2" (3 cm) nearly wide, to with the QUICK clasping stem leaves, often purple. ID difficulty DESCRIPTION: Winter annual. midrib, the sinuses between them wide and entire. cut The upper midrib. especially on and flat veins. The midrib is hairy underneath. Stems hairless, solid, pointed lobes 90° to proximal the lobes. The distal third of the blade may be single, 2-6' surface has hairy bumps erect, straight, unbranched below the inflorescence, nodes. Stem leaves round, alternate, heavily coated 1-5 (60-180 cm) tall, strictly except for very faint ridges descending from the skyward and almost with white bloom, smooth lowermost twice that long), spaced regularly up the stem, pointing round-tipped (2.5-13 cm) lanceolate long (the or tapered to the pointed tip, broadest at the base, clasping with hairs 2 on narrow, the midvein below appressed, The blades are hairless except that low to mid-stem leaves have a line of above, Midvein lobes. in a deep valley, projecting below but not sharply keeled; other veins are flat and obscure giving the leaf a very smooth surface. Lower leaves are purple on the underside; those on young plants often dark purple on both sides. Inflorescence branch- ing but the branches almost pressed together, all pointing up; multiple racemes to 24" (6c cm) long, the flowers blooming in an elongated clus- ter at the tip. Flowers 5-7 mm wide, the 4 elliptic petals creamy to pale yellow, on short pedicels. Pods to 3" (8 cm) long, rod-like and very narrow. crowded, overlapping, and appressed. HABITAT: Sandy fields, dry meadows, barrens, and roadsides. Native. FOOD USE: The shoots make a good vegetable in spring; raw they are acceptable, but steamed or briefly boiled they are excellent. Older growth quickly becomes too tough to eat. Leaves may remain tender even on flowering plants but are usually strong and bit- ter in flavor. Conserva- tion 2. COMMENTS: At maturity this is one of the easiest herbaceous plants in our region to recognize. The shoots are not well known, but excellent if you can identify them at that stage. AKA Tur- ritis glabra 406 