0
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
29 Field mustard
2
3
3
Brassica rapa Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
QUICK CHECK: Large, spring-blooming mustard with yellow flowers and a smooth stem:
wer leaves lobed, upper stem leaves clasping and entire. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Annual or winter annual. Basal leaves in a rosette, up to 18" (46 cm)
long, deeply pinnately lobed or divided, the lobes/divisions usually alternate and some-
times twisted, the terminal lobe containing most of the leaf's surface area. The blades
are ruffled, with scattered hairs growing from light-colored bumps on the upper surface
and on the midrib below. Midrib whitish in color with thin, continuous wings of varying
Sparse over
width, essentially flat; smaller veins slightly depressed to flat. Margins irregularly wavy and
much of this
toothed, sometimes shallowly lobed, with scattered hairs. Stems 2-5' (60-150 cm) tall,
range but locally
solid when young but sometimes with a small hollow when older, smooth, gently ridged,
abundant.
with few to no hairs, usually covered by a whitish bloom. Stem leaves clasping; lower ones pinnately lobed with
proximal lobes pointing back toward the stem; going up the stem they become progressively smaller and less
lobed. Uppermost leaves much smaller, elongated, unlobed, with pointed tips and entire or sparsely toothed
margins, the bases clasping with overlapping rounded lobes. Inflorescence a
terminal raceme of more than 12, the pedicels about 1" (2.5 cm) long, 90°
to the rachis. Flowers (spring) 9-11 mm across with 4 obovate yellow
petals, not veiny. Pods 1-2" long, thin, curved toward the tip, round in
cross section, containing numerous tiny, dark seeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Black mustard, charlock mustard, and wild rad-
ish all bloom later in the season; they have hairy stems and their upper
leaves are not clasping. The differences listed in many technical manuals
to separate the closely related B. napus often do not work in the field.
The two are so similar that foragers need not worry over the distinction.
HABITAT: Disturbed soil, especially farmland, roadsides, and construc-
tion sites. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Gather any tender growth. Greens can be used raw or
cooked like cultivated mustard or turnip greens. Flower bud clusters
are like miniature, superior broccoli. Shoot tips are very mild in flavor
and are good raw or briefly steamed. Field mustard is most prevalent
in spring, although occasionally one can get greens from it later in
summer or autumn.
COMMENTS: This locally abundant plant is the wild ancestor/descen-
dant of the cultivated turnip. The flavor is mild, and it is one of our best
wild mustards.
0 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY 29 Field mustard 2 3 3 Brassica rapa Brassicaceae (Mustard family) QUICK CHECK: Large, spring-blooming mustard with yellow flowers and a smooth stem: wer leaves lobed, upper stem leaves clasping and entire. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Annual or winter annual. Basal leaves in a rosette, up to 18" (46 cm) long, deeply pinnately lobed or divided, the lobes/divisions usually alternate and some- times twisted, the terminal lobe containing most of the leaf's surface area. The blades are ruffled, with scattered hairs growing from light-colored bumps on the upper surface and on the midrib below. Midrib whitish in color with thin, continuous wings of varying Sparse over width, essentially flat; smaller veins slightly depressed to flat. Margins irregularly wavy and much of this toothed, sometimes shallowly lobed, with scattered hairs. Stems 2-5' (60-150 cm) tall, range but locally solid when young but sometimes with a small hollow when older, smooth, gently ridged, abundant. with few to no hairs, usually covered by a whitish bloom. Stem leaves clasping; lower ones pinnately lobed with proximal lobes pointing back toward the stem; going up the stem they become progressively smaller and less lobed. Uppermost leaves much smaller, elongated, unlobed, with pointed tips and entire or sparsely toothed margins, the bases clasping with overlapping rounded lobes. Inflorescence a terminal raceme of more than 12, the pedicels about 1" (2.5 cm) long, 90° to the rachis. Flowers (spring) 9-11 mm across with 4 obovate yellow petals, not veiny. Pods 1-2" long, thin, curved toward the tip, round in cross section, containing numerous tiny, dark seeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: Black mustard, charlock mustard, and wild rad- ish all bloom later in the season; they have hairy stems and their upper leaves are not clasping. The differences listed in many technical manuals to separate the closely related B. napus often do not work in the field. The two are so similar that foragers need not worry over the distinction. HABITAT: Disturbed soil, especially farmland, roadsides, and construc- tion sites. Introduced. FOOD USE: Gather any tender growth. Greens can be used raw or cooked like cultivated mustard or turnip greens. Flower bud clusters are like miniature, superior broccoli. Shoot tips are very mild in flavor and are good raw or briefly steamed. Field mustard is most prevalent in spring, although occasionally one can get greens from it later in summer or autumn. COMMENTS: This locally abundant plant is the wild ancestor/descen- dant of the cultivated turnip. The flavor is mild, and it is one of our best wild mustards. 