LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE,
LOBED BASAL OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT
30 Bastard
Rapistrum cabbage rugosum Brassicaceae 1 2 (Mustard family)
blooming yellow in cool seasons, with rough, difficulty hairy, 1. blunt-tipped,
mostly with rosette that persists at least through the early tip,
QUICK basal CHECK: leaves; Mustard stems almost naked; tiny round pods. ID
DESCRIPTION: leaves Annual (and or winter lowest annual stem leaves) a 6-10" (15-25 cut cm) lobes long, near rounded the base; at the
flowering. Basal outline with some small but deeply succulent, both
oblanceolate or is elliptic merely in toothed or wavy-edged. The blade is thick, almost from light-colored
distal majority with scattered, stiff, leaning, whitish hairs, those on top growing Secondary veins at
Widespread but
scarce outside
surfaces purple, depressed above and protruding below. of blade length,
mapped area.
bumps. Midrib deeply pale or depressed above and protruding below. Petiole 5-10 % blade starts).
slightly triangular cm) tall but often first blooming when much shorter; erect, zigzag, Stems somewhat branch widely grooved
broad angles, with a deep, narrow groove on top (becoming flat where the solid,
Stems 2-5' (60-150 hairy at first and near the base but almost hairless in the upper parts. on petioles, reduced on
or robust flattened, plants very but smaller ones may be simple and spire-like. Stem leaves alternate, few, hairless. Inflores-
in size upward, often deeply folded and ascending, the underside hairy but the top almost
cence long, wiry terminal racemes to 20" (50 cm). Flowers 6-9 mm across with 4 nearly round, bright-yellow,
stalked petals and 4 narrow yellow sepals. Pods ball-like, the round part 2-3 mm, grooved lengthwise, beaked
at the base and the tip, on an appressed pedicel 4-6 mm long, containing 1-2 seeds.
HABITAT: Disturbed soil in full sun. Yards, construction sites, agricultural fields, vacant lots, weedy areas.
Introduced.
FOOD USE: Leaves can be eaten raw or cooked-mostly in winter and spring. They are hairy and rough, so
they hold dirt easily and are better when softened by cooking. Tender tops and shoots of robust plants taste
better and are less likely to be dirty. The
flavor is cabbage-like-not very hot.
COMMENTS: This mustard is extremely
common in the east half of Texas; in this
area it should be one of the first mustards
you learn. Outside of Texas and southern
Oklahoma it is sparse or absent. No other
mustard can be more easily recognized by
its pods. AKA turnipweed, ball mustard.
408
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE, LOBED BASAL OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT 30 Bastard Rapistrum cabbage rugosum Brassicaceae 1 2 (Mustard family) blooming yellow in cool seasons, with rough, difficulty hairy, 1. blunt-tipped, mostly with rosette that persists at least through the early tip, QUICK basal CHECK: leaves; Mustard stems almost naked; tiny round pods. ID DESCRIPTION: leaves Annual (and or winter lowest annual stem leaves) a 6-10" (15-25 cut cm) lobes long, near rounded the base; at the flowering. Basal outline with some small but deeply succulent, both oblanceolate or is elliptic merely in toothed or wavy-edged. The blade is thick, almost from light-colored distal majority with scattered, stiff, leaning, whitish hairs, those on top growing Secondary veins at Widespread but scarce outside surfaces purple, depressed above and protruding below. of blade length, mapped area. bumps. Midrib deeply pale or depressed above and protruding below. Petiole 5-10 % blade starts). slightly triangular cm) tall but often first blooming when much shorter; erect, zigzag, Stems somewhat branch widely grooved broad angles, with a deep, narrow groove on top (becoming flat where the solid, Stems 2-5' (60-150 hairy at first and near the base but almost hairless in the upper parts. on petioles, reduced on or robust flattened, plants very but smaller ones may be simple and spire-like. Stem leaves alternate, few, hairless. Inflores- in size upward, often deeply folded and ascending, the underside hairy but the top almost cence long, wiry terminal racemes to 20" (50 cm). Flowers 6-9 mm across with 4 nearly round, bright-yellow, stalked petals and 4 narrow yellow sepals. Pods ball-like, the round part 2-3 mm, grooved lengthwise, beaked at the base and the tip, on an appressed pedicel 4-6 mm long, containing 1-2 seeds. HABITAT: Disturbed soil in full sun. Yards, construction sites, agricultural fields, vacant lots, weedy areas. Introduced. FOOD USE: Leaves can be eaten raw or cooked-mostly in winter and spring. They are hairy and rough, so they hold dirt easily and are better when softened by cooking. Tender tops and shoots of robust plants taste better and are less likely to be dirty. The flavor is cabbage-like-not very hot. COMMENTS: This mustard is extremely common in the east half of Texas; in this area it should be one of the first mustards you learn. Outside of Texas and southern Oklahoma it is sparse or absent. No other mustard can be more easily recognized by its pods. AKA turnipweed, ball mustard. 408 