sicacede (Mustard f family:
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
31 Hill mustard
3
2
2
difficulty.
Bunias orientalis Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
(oothed QUICK CHECK: Erect mustard with yellow flowers in early summer; leaves cointed.
or lobed; stems warty; pods nearly rotund, ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: mustard Perennial mustard with a mild but distinct scent reminiscent
(p. 402), producing multiple adjacent rosettes from branching root of blue
Rosette leaves 7-12" (18-30 cm) long, lanceolate, usually with 4 side lobes near the crowns.
first pair fully divided from the rest of the blade, the lobes broad at the base and base, the
Petiole
abruptly to a long, narrow point. Beyond these proximal lobes the leaf is tapered narrowing and toothed but
Surfaces have scattered hairs, more prevalent above. Midvein whitish, flat to slightly depressed; not lobed.
veins slightly depressed above. Margins have large teeth pointing outward with nipple tips. Petiole secondary 15-20% of
blade length, purple at the base, not channeled, flat above and rounded below, hairier than the blade, the hairs
nearly appressed and pointing toward the base. Rosette leaves wither with flowering. Stems erect, straight,
with no branches in the lower half, usually clumped, 32-48" (80-120 cm) tall, 8-12 mm thick, solid, roundish
with fine, irregular ridges and a few gentle angles, bright purple at the base, with scattered, soft, leaning hairs
and many small, wart-like bumps that are often darkened. Stem leaves smaller and narrower than those of the
rosette, the lower ones on petioles and lobed, the upper ones unlobed and becoming sessile. The margins
are irregularly and sparsely toothed, the teeth often pointed toward the tip. Inflorescence many ascending
racemes in the upper third, each with 8-20 flowers blooming simultaneously at the tip on pedicels 0.6" (15 mm)
long. Flowers (late spring) 4-6 mm across, with four obovate yellow petals and 4 much smaller yellow sepals.
Pods nearly rotund with a beak-like tip, 5-9 mm long.
HABITAT: Sunny, open areas with well-drained rich soil: roadsides, meadows, pastures. Introduced. T
FOOD USE: Young leaves, tender shoots, and flower bud
clusters can all be used as a vegetable, raw or cooked,
in spring.
COMMENTS: This mustard is sometimes cultivated; it is
currently very local in North America, but where round it
is often extremely abundant. It is allelopathic. releasing
chemicals that inhibit the growth of competing plants, 50
that it forms large, pure stands to the exclusion of native
vegetation. Hill mustard should NOT be spread intention-
ally AKA Turkish cabbage, Turkish rocket, warty cabbage
sicacede (Mustard f family: BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY 31 Hill mustard 3 2 2 difficulty. Bunias orientalis Brassicaceae (Mustard family) (oothed QUICK CHECK: Erect mustard with yellow flowers in early summer; leaves cointed. or lobed; stems warty; pods nearly rotund, ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: mustard Perennial mustard with a mild but distinct scent reminiscent (p. 402), producing multiple adjacent rosettes from branching root of blue Rosette leaves 7-12" (18-30 cm) long, lanceolate, usually with 4 side lobes near the crowns. first pair fully divided from the rest of the blade, the lobes broad at the base and base, the Petiole abruptly to a long, narrow point. Beyond these proximal lobes the leaf is tapered narrowing and toothed but Surfaces have scattered hairs, more prevalent above. Midvein whitish, flat to slightly depressed; not lobed. veins slightly depressed above. Margins have large teeth pointing outward with nipple tips. Petiole secondary 15-20% of blade length, purple at the base, not channeled, flat above and rounded below, hairier than the blade, the hairs nearly appressed and pointing toward the base. Rosette leaves wither with flowering. Stems erect, straight, with no branches in the lower half, usually clumped, 32-48" (80-120 cm) tall, 8-12 mm thick, solid, roundish with fine, irregular ridges and a few gentle angles, bright purple at the base, with scattered, soft, leaning hairs and many small, wart-like bumps that are often darkened. Stem leaves smaller and narrower than those of the rosette, the lower ones on petioles and lobed, the upper ones unlobed and becoming sessile. The margins are irregularly and sparsely toothed, the teeth often pointed toward the tip. Inflorescence many ascending racemes in the upper third, each with 8-20 flowers blooming simultaneously at the tip on pedicels 0.6" (15 mm) long. Flowers (late spring) 4-6 mm across, with four obovate yellow petals and 4 much smaller yellow sepals. Pods nearly rotund with a beak-like tip, 5-9 mm long. HABITAT: Sunny, open areas with well-drained rich soil: roadsides, meadows, pastures. Introduced. T FOOD USE: Young leaves, tender shoots, and flower bud clusters can all be used as a vegetable, raw or cooked, in spring. COMMENTS: This mustard is sometimes cultivated; it is currently very local in North America, but where round it is often extremely abundant. It is allelopathic. releasing chemicals that inhibit the growth of competing plants, 50 that it forms large, pure stands to the exclusion of native vegetation. Hill mustard should NOT be spread intention- ally AKA Turkish cabbage, Turkish rocket, warty cabbage 