BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
Black mustard
3
3
IWE-45
32
Brassica nigra Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
Must and with yellow flowers above your head in midsummer; lower leaves
with QUICK a large CHECK: terminal segment; long overlapping pods held against the stem. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Annual with a short-lived rosette, the basal leaves soon disappearing
as the stem emerges. Lower leaves to 18" (46 cm) long with a large, irregularly toothed,
shallowly lobed terminal segment
up to 12" (30 cm) long and about as
wide, comprising 90-95% of the leaf surface. Lower on
the rachis are 2-4 much smaller, usually fully separated
segments. Blades ruffled, with sparse needle-hairs grow-
ing from bumps above; hairier underneath, especially
on the veins. Veins and veinlets depressed above and
protruding below. Margins have obtuse, light, nipple-
tipped teeth. Petiole deeper than wide, bluntly keeled,
scarcely channeled except near the base (which is more
deeply channeled), the rachis with a faint, close, double
wing along the top. Stems single, erect, to 8' (2.4 m) tall
and 0.9" (23 mm) thick, smooth, green to purple, faintly
ridged, solid, bloom-coated, with large but scattered
needle-hairs near the base, decreasing to few or none
on the upper stems. Upper stem leaves are coarsely and
irregularly toothed but not lobed. Uppermost leaves at
bloom are entire, elongated, tapered at both ends, and droop-
ing on long petioles. Inflorescence lanky, nearly leafless,
sparse, with many long, twisting, curvy, or leaning racemes,
rising 1-3' (30-90 cm) above the leafy zone of the plant;
open flowers are crowded at the tip. Flowers (mid to late
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY Black mustard 3 3 IWE-45 32 Brassica nigra Brassicaceae (Mustard family) Must and with yellow flowers above your head in midsummer; lower leaves with QUICK a large CHECK: terminal segment; long overlapping pods held against the stem. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Annual with a short-lived rosette, the basal leaves soon disappearing as the stem emerges. Lower leaves to 18" (46 cm) long with a large, irregularly toothed, shallowly lobed terminal segment up to 12" (30 cm) long and about as wide, comprising 90-95% of the leaf surface. Lower on the rachis are 2-4 much smaller, usually fully separated segments. Blades ruffled, with sparse needle-hairs grow- ing from bumps above; hairier underneath, especially on the veins. Veins and veinlets depressed above and protruding below. Margins have obtuse, light, nipple- tipped teeth. Petiole deeper than wide, bluntly keeled, scarcely channeled except near the base (which is more deeply channeled), the rachis with a faint, close, double wing along the top. Stems single, erect, to 8' (2.4 m) tall and 0.9" (23 mm) thick, smooth, green to purple, faintly ridged, solid, bloom-coated, with large but scattered needle-hairs near the base, decreasing to few or none on the upper stems. Upper stem leaves are coarsely and irregularly toothed but not lobed. Uppermost leaves at bloom are entire, elongated, tapered at both ends, and droop- ing on long petioles. Inflorescence lanky, nearly leafless, sparse, with many long, twisting, curvy, or leaning racemes, rising 1-3' (30-90 cm) above the leafy zone of the plant; open flowers are crowded at the tip. Flowers (mid to late 