prossicocede (Mustard f family)
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
are summer) also yellow. 9-13 mm Pods across long with four fan shaped yellow petals, each with
and nearly appressed. Seeds and spherical narrow, and roundish light brown with 4 to ridges, reddish narrowed brown a or long and dark stalked beak-like base: 7' the the tip. 1 linear overlapping sena
HABITAT: uilding sites, Disturbed compost soil, heaps, especially Introduced. where very rich and hilly. Commonly found in gray gardens. agricultural fields.
FOOD raw or cooked-those USE: Young plants are found mostly from early to mid summer. Leaves and tender
the stems. near the inflorescence are much hotter than lower parts. Leaves are more tips pungent are excellent than
Ripe seeds can be collected by
stripping the dry pods or beating the mature
tops, then winnowing (see p.27). Black mus-
tard is grown commercially for its hot seeds.
COMMENTS: This giant mustard is locally
abundant in rich soil. The flavor is great if
you can handle the heat. (The uppermost
greens are fire-in-the-sinus hot.) The seeds
make my favorite wild mustard.
Related edible:
33 White mustard Sinapis alba
A belly-high, yellow-flowered, summer-blooming weedy mustard with short, broad leaves
with a few large lobes. The pods are curved and tapered with a halo of white hairs around
the base. The tender greens can be collected from early summer through autumn, and
the seeds can be used to make a condiment. This mustard is extremely easy to recognize
in fruit. It is pure nose-burning hot, without any horseradish flavor or bitterness-one of
the best hot greens.
Widespread
but sporadic
411
prossicocede (Mustard f family) BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY are summer) also yellow. 9-13 mm Pods across long with four fan shaped yellow petals, each with and nearly appressed. Seeds and spherical narrow, and roundish light brown with 4 to ridges, reddish narrowed brown a or long and dark stalked beak-like base: 7' the the tip. 1 linear overlapping sena HABITAT: uilding sites, Disturbed compost soil, heaps, especially Introduced. where very rich and hilly. Commonly found in gray gardens. agricultural fields. FOOD raw or cooked-those USE: Young plants are found mostly from early to mid summer. Leaves and tender the stems. near the inflorescence are much hotter than lower parts. Leaves are more tips pungent are excellent than Ripe seeds can be collected by stripping the dry pods or beating the mature tops, then winnowing (see p.27). Black mus- tard is grown commercially for its hot seeds. COMMENTS: This giant mustard is locally abundant in rich soil. The flavor is great if you can handle the heat. (The uppermost greens are fire-in-the-sinus hot.) The seeds make my favorite wild mustard. Related edible: 33 White mustard Sinapis alba A belly-high, yellow-flowered, summer-blooming weedy mustard with short, broad leaves with a few large lobes. The pods are curved and tapered with a halo of white hairs around the base. The tender greens can be collected from early summer through autumn, and the seeds can be used to make a condiment. This mustard is extremely easy to recognize in fruit. It is pure nose-burning hot, without any horseradish flavor or bitterness-one of the best hot greens. Widespread but sporadic 411 