BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE,
LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT
34 Hedge mustard
2
(Mustard
family)
Sisymbrium few widely spaced lobes; plant loses against its leaves the
officinale
Brassicaceae
when QUICK bearing CHECK: seed; Stem tiny, leaves tightly with clumped a yellow flowers; pods pressed
stem. ID difficulty 1. sparse, airy look. Basal leaves pinnately lobed terminal almost lobe to
DESCRIPTION: Annual with a side lobes (the first of which are linear); the the midvein
is often blunt. above. Stems up to 4' (1.2 m) tall, rounded numerous Branches fine ridges, slightly the
the midvein, with Blades 8-12 have narrow scattered hairs on both sides, most prevalent on with
beneath. Veins strongly depressed toward the base, with scattered stiff hairs (more near the Stem base). leaves alternate, near few
glaucous, often purplish ascending; upper branches spread at a nearly right angle. back toward the stem.
base erect or strongly lobed but with only 3 or 5 lobes, the first two at a right angle or pointing lobe of mid-stem
and sparse, pinnately separated. The midrib between lobes has a thin leafy wing. The terminal Petioles short, winged,
and leaves shallowly channeled. Uppermost leaves are reduced, clasping, and often unlobed. with a long
and usually is roughly widely diamond-shaped and often has two ear-iike flares near the base. Inflorescence
raceme with only a small, tight group of 3-7 flowers blooming at the tip. Flowers 4-6 mm across 4 light
yellow petals. Pods long and very thin with pointed tips, tightly appressed on short pedicels. As the plant
matures and the seedpods ripen, it drops all its leaves. The seed-bearing top is large and sparse with long,
thin, curvy limbs spreading widely and bearing pods almost their entire length.
HABITAT: Disturbed rich soil in full to partial sunlight, usually around human habitation. This common weed
seems to like growing along building
foundations and large objects (such
as water tanks, junked cars, or lumber
piles). Introduced.
FOOD USE: Young leaves and stems
are prime in early summer. The young-
est plants are tender but dainty, with
smali leaves; you can cut the whole
thing for greens. Slightly later, as flow-
ering begins, the tender stem tips are
thin with few leaves and little volume;
at this time it is easiest to pick the larg-
est leaves from further down the stalk
rather than mess with the spindly top.
COMMENTS: This is one of our hot-
test mustards, with a horseradish-like
flavor, Greens in or near the young inflo-
rescence are especially potent.
Mid
412
Lower leaf.
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE, LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT 34 Hedge mustard 2 (Mustard family) Sisymbrium few widely spaced lobes; plant loses against its leaves the officinale Brassicaceae when QUICK bearing CHECK: seed; Stem tiny, leaves tightly with clumped a yellow flowers; pods pressed stem. ID difficulty 1. sparse, airy look. Basal leaves pinnately lobed terminal almost lobe to DESCRIPTION: Annual with a side lobes (the first of which are linear); the the midvein is often blunt. above. Stems up to 4' (1.2 m) tall, rounded numerous Branches fine ridges, slightly the the midvein, with Blades 8-12 have narrow scattered hairs on both sides, most prevalent on with beneath. Veins strongly depressed toward the base, with scattered stiff hairs (more near the Stem base). leaves alternate, near few glaucous, often purplish ascending; upper branches spread at a nearly right angle. back toward the stem. base erect or strongly lobed but with only 3 or 5 lobes, the first two at a right angle or pointing lobe of mid-stem and sparse, pinnately separated. The midrib between lobes has a thin leafy wing. The terminal Petioles short, winged, and leaves shallowly channeled. Uppermost leaves are reduced, clasping, and often unlobed. with a long and usually is roughly widely diamond-shaped and often has two ear-iike flares near the base. Inflorescence raceme with only a small, tight group of 3-7 flowers blooming at the tip. Flowers 4-6 mm across 4 light yellow petals. Pods long and very thin with pointed tips, tightly appressed on short pedicels. As the plant matures and the seedpods ripen, it drops all its leaves. The seed-bearing top is large and sparse with long, thin, curvy limbs spreading widely and bearing pods almost their entire length. HABITAT: Disturbed rich soil in full to partial sunlight, usually around human habitation. This common weed seems to like growing along building foundations and large objects (such as water tanks, junked cars, or lumber piles). Introduced. FOOD USE: Young leaves and stems are prime in early summer. The young- est plants are tender but dainty, with smali leaves; you can cut the whole thing for greens. Slightly later, as flow- ering begins, the tender stem tips are thin with few leaves and little volume; at this time it is easiest to pick the larg- est leaves from further down the stalk rather than mess with the spindly top. COMMENTS: This is one of our hot- test mustards, with a horseradish-like flavor, Greens in or near the young inflo- rescence are especially potent. Mid 412 Lower leaf. 