Prossicaceder
BASAL LEAVES LOBED PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
35 Tall hedge mustard
2
2
Sisymbrium loeselii Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
QUICK late spring; CHECK: the leaves Tall, hairy are deeply mustard lobed. with ID long difficulty racemes 1. of yellow Howers blooming in
all DESCRIPTION: have long, Winter annual (usually) or annual. The stem, petioles,
toothed and 2-3" (5-8 cm) wide, deeply pinnately lobed, the lobes flowering, to 10"
(25 cm) long erect, and stiff hairs. Basal leaves in rosettes, withering during and leaf blades
(1-1.7 m) tall twisted, hairy on both sides. Veins strongly depressed above. pointed, Stem often
needle-like hairs. and 9-15 mm thick, roundish with a small hollow in the center, densely 3-5-5
straight before The upper stem has fine ridges, but the lower stem does not. The shoot covered with long, erect,
shortening producing many long, strongly ascending branches. Stem leaves have first grows tall and
first is toward the top; these lobes are much narrower than those of basal leaves and 2-4 lobes per side.
set angled back toward the stem. Inflorescence racemes held erect, to 26" (66 cm) long, pointed, the and the
ascending. Flowers (late spring to early summer) 6-7 mm across with 4 nearly round yellow petals. Pods pedicels 1-2
(2-5 cm) long, thin, cylindrical, nearly straight, longer and thicker than the pedicels.
HABITAT: Dry, sunny, disturbed sites; roadsides, railroads, vacant lots, crop field margins. Introduced
FOOD USE: Basal leaves in early spring are very mild and can
be used as a salad green or potherb. Once the stems begin
to grow this plant's flavor changes dramatically; the stem
tips and stem leaves are then horseradish-hot and similar
to hedge mustard.
COMMENTS: This weed is one of the most abundant mus-
tards in the eastern Plains and western Midwest, but it seems
to be a newcomer, for it is way more common than herbarium
records suggest. The flavor change with age is astounding,
perhaps the greatest that 1 am aware of for any plant. The
biggest drawback to this green is the stiff hairs which detract
from the mouth-feel.
413
Prossicaceder BASAL LEAVES LOBED PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY 35 Tall hedge mustard 2 2 Sisymbrium loeselii Brassicaceae (Mustard family) QUICK late spring; CHECK: the leaves Tall, hairy are deeply mustard lobed. with ID long difficulty racemes 1. of yellow Howers blooming in all DESCRIPTION: have long, Winter annual (usually) or annual. The stem, petioles, toothed and 2-3" (5-8 cm) wide, deeply pinnately lobed, the lobes flowering, to 10" (25 cm) long erect, and stiff hairs. Basal leaves in rosettes, withering during and leaf blades (1-1.7 m) tall twisted, hairy on both sides. Veins strongly depressed above. pointed, Stem often needle-like hairs. and 9-15 mm thick, roundish with a small hollow in the center, densely 3-5-5 straight before The upper stem has fine ridges, but the lower stem does not. The shoot covered with long, erect, shortening producing many long, strongly ascending branches. Stem leaves have first grows tall and first is toward the top; these lobes are much narrower than those of basal leaves and 2-4 lobes per side. set angled back toward the stem. Inflorescence racemes held erect, to 26" (66 cm) long, pointed, the and the ascending. Flowers (late spring to early summer) 6-7 mm across with 4 nearly round yellow petals. Pods pedicels 1-2 (2-5 cm) long, thin, cylindrical, nearly straight, longer and thicker than the pedicels. HABITAT: Dry, sunny, disturbed sites; roadsides, railroads, vacant lots, crop field margins. Introduced FOOD USE: Basal leaves in early spring are very mild and can be used as a salad green or potherb. Once the stems begin to grow this plant's flavor changes dramatically; the stem tips and stem leaves are then horseradish-hot and similar to hedge mustard. COMMENTS: This weed is one of the most abundant mus- tards in the eastern Plains and western Midwest, but it seems to be a newcomer, for it is way more common than herbarium records suggest. The flavor change with age is astounding, perhaps the greatest that 1 am aware of for any plant. The biggest drawback to this green is the stiff hairs which detract from the mouth-feel. 413 