LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE,
BASAL LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT
36 Tumble
Sisymbrium mustard altissimum 2 Brassicaceae 1 basal (Mustard leaves have family) many
QUICK CHECK: Mustard leaves with are glaucous thread-like; and sparsely pale yellow hairy flowers stem; in summer. ID difficulty becom- 1.
DESCRIPTION: long lobes, uppermost Annual or winter annual, taller tumbleweed than wide at maturity. when young, Basal the leaves top up to
ing a broad and bushy often resting but loose on and the ground, airy present leaf on young base. Distally plants but the disappearing larger basal
with 14" (36 flowering. cm) deeply long, Lobes pinnately or divisions lobed, begin with the very lobes near long, the narrow, lobes and well-spaced; with large teeth; proximally these lobes they are often divided have
fully leaves to are the midrib. on the proximal Smaller basal side pointing leaves toward may have the triangular base. Surfaces has have a small erect double-wing hairs on both ridge sides. on its The top, midrib with
is round, hollow, not channeled even at the (1.5 base; m) tall, single, erect, solid, light gray-green, zigzag, the inflorescence).
one sub-lobe the proximal portion smooth and
both wings oriented also with vertically. scattered Stem long, to 5' thin, wavy hairs (these densest near or curve the base inward and in and downward to fill
glaucous but ascending; in fruit these grow longer and branch scar. Stem leaves become
Branches many and form. Each branch juncture has a dark line forming a raised lobes point vertically.
out the tumbleweed the divisions longer and narrower with fewer teeth. Many (8 cm) long. Inflo-
progressively more divided, extremely thin, deeply folded, mostly entire, thread-like lobes up to 3" rachis elongates and
Uppermost leaves have racemes; at bloom the flowers are crowded at the tip, but in fruit the white, 8-13 mm
rescence from many adjacent long racemes intermingle in a giant tangle. Flowers pale yellow to almost stiff, the
the pods with petals in 2 pairs (not at right angles to each other). Pods up to 4" (10 cm) long, very the look
same across, thickness 4 as the pedicels but 6-10 times longer, and not angled at the juncture-making pod
like a leafless branch.
HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny, dry sites; roadsides, railroad banks,
vacant lots, crop fields, ditch banks. Introduced.
FOOD USE: All young, tender growth is edible: leaves, flower buds,
and stems. Gather these mostly in spring. Basal leaves are mild, but
when the stems appear a hotness and a less desirable strong flavor soon
develops, especially in the inflorescence. Use these parts in moderation.
COMMENTS: This is one of many "tumbleweeds" on the Great Plains;
the dead plants break from their roots and tumble in the wind to
disperse the seeds. Although the scientific species name means "the
tallest," this species tends to be shorter than S. loeselii. The pods are
remarkably long and stiff, but one of my favorite books says they grow
up to four feet long. Even my uncle wouldn't exaggerate that bad, so
it must be a typo.
414
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MILKY ALTERNATE, BASAL LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT 36 Tumble Sisymbrium mustard altissimum 2 Brassicaceae 1 basal (Mustard leaves have family) many QUICK CHECK: Mustard leaves with are glaucous thread-like; and sparsely pale yellow hairy flowers stem; in summer. ID difficulty becom- 1. DESCRIPTION: long lobes, uppermost Annual or winter annual, taller tumbleweed than wide at maturity. when young, Basal the leaves top up to ing a broad and bushy often resting but loose on and the ground, airy present leaf on young base. Distally plants but the disappearing larger basal with 14" (36 flowering. cm) deeply long, Lobes pinnately or divisions lobed, begin with the very lobes near long, the narrow, lobes and well-spaced; with large teeth; proximally these lobes they are often divided have fully leaves to are the midrib. on the proximal Smaller basal side pointing leaves toward may have the triangular base. Surfaces has have a small erect double-wing hairs on both ridge sides. on its The top, midrib with is round, hollow, not channeled even at the (1.5 base; m) tall, single, erect, solid, light gray-green, zigzag, the inflorescence). one sub-lobe the proximal portion smooth and both wings oriented also with vertically. scattered Stem long, to 5' thin, wavy hairs (these densest near or curve the base inward and in and downward to fill glaucous but ascending; in fruit these grow longer and branch scar. Stem leaves become Branches many and form. Each branch juncture has a dark line forming a raised lobes point vertically. out the tumbleweed the divisions longer and narrower with fewer teeth. Many (8 cm) long. Inflo- progressively more divided, extremely thin, deeply folded, mostly entire, thread-like lobes up to 3" rachis elongates and Uppermost leaves have racemes; at bloom the flowers are crowded at the tip, but in fruit the white, 8-13 mm rescence from many adjacent long racemes intermingle in a giant tangle. Flowers pale yellow to almost stiff, the the pods with petals in 2 pairs (not at right angles to each other). Pods up to 4" (10 cm) long, very the look same across, thickness 4 as the pedicels but 6-10 times longer, and not angled at the juncture-making pod like a leafless branch. HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny, dry sites; roadsides, railroad banks, vacant lots, crop fields, ditch banks. Introduced. FOOD USE: All young, tender growth is edible: leaves, flower buds, and stems. Gather these mostly in spring. Basal leaves are mild, but when the stems appear a hotness and a less desirable strong flavor soon develops, especially in the inflorescence. Use these parts in moderation. COMMENTS: This is one of many "tumbleweeds" on the Great Plains; the dead plants break from their roots and tumble in the wind to disperse the seeds. Although the scientific species name means "the tallest," this species tends to be shorter than S. loeselii. The pods are remarkably long and stiff, but one of my favorite books says they grow up to four feet long. Even my uncle wouldn't exaggerate that bad, so it must be a typo. 414 