BASAL LEAVES LOBED PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
Highway mustard
3
Coincya monensis + Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
ICK yellow CHECK: Lanky mustard, much branched near the base, with sparso
flowers in early summer. ID difficulty 1.
SCRIPTION: stiff, Annual or winter annual from a taproot, all vegetative
divided with needle-like hairs. Basal leaves in a rosette, to 10" (25 cm) long, parts with scat-
15-19 lobes, these well-spaced and longer than wide, the pinnately lobed
and broadest near the base, the distal ones broadest near the proximal and ones
or withers with a few large, blunt teeth. Surfaces rough-hairy on both sides tip with depressed shallowly
by flowering. Rachis often purple, flat to wing-channeled above. Stems major veins Rosette
branched at or near the base (with few branches above that), the branches nearly single or few, ofter
Stems reach 2.5-4' (75-120 cm) tall and 12 mm thick, weakly ridged and angled, equal coated to the stem n
leaves alternate, sparse (especially upward), deeply pinnately lobed/divided, with cont with bloom
occasional extensions along the rachis. Major veins more deeply depressed than on basal a leaves. nuous Toward wing
top of the plant lobes get progressively fewer, longer, narrower, and more fully divided with few to no teeth:
lobes are right angled to the midrib. Lobes are often deeply folded. Petiole/midrib has a shallow
is offset by light color. Inflorescence racemes 10-14" (25-36 cm) long, the tips crowded and umbel-like. groove
evenly spaced pedicels at maturity. Flowers (late spring to early summer) to 0.7 (18 mm) across, with
right yellow petals with distinct veins, especially beneath. The base is a tubular calyx with 4 stiff-hairy triangular
at the tip. Pods long and narrow, curved, roundish, to 3" (8 cm) long with a flattened beak. spreading
90° to the rachis on pedicels to 8 mm long.
HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny, gravelly soil; especially roadsides
Introduced.
FOOD USE: All the tender parts can be eaten raw or cooked.
from spring through early summer. This is one of the milder-
flavored mustards.
COMMENTS: This enigmatic species is abundant in Penn-
sylvania but is almost never found anywhere else. However,
since its spread in PA has been rapid, I'm assuming it will soon
spread outside of that
state. This is perhaps
the most attractive of
our weedy mustards,
and one of the best for
eating. too. It doesn
have a common name
here, but in the UK it
goes by the eloquently
beautiful (read with
sarcasm) "Isle-of-Man
Cabbage." I made up
"highway mustard,
which is not only accu-
rate, but conveniently
shorter than "Pennsyl
vania-railroad-right-of-
way cabbage."
415
BASAL LEAVES LOBED PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY Highway mustard 3 Coincya monensis + Brassicaceae (Mustard family) ICK yellow CHECK: Lanky mustard, much branched near the base, with sparso flowers in early summer. ID difficulty 1. SCRIPTION: stiff, Annual or winter annual from a taproot, all vegetative divided with needle-like hairs. Basal leaves in a rosette, to 10" (25 cm) long, parts with scat- 15-19 lobes, these well-spaced and longer than wide, the pinnately lobed and broadest near the base, the distal ones broadest near the proximal and ones or withers with a few large, blunt teeth. Surfaces rough-hairy on both sides tip with depressed shallowly by flowering. Rachis often purple, flat to wing-channeled above. Stems major veins Rosette branched at or near the base (with few branches above that), the branches nearly single or few, ofter Stems reach 2.5-4' (75-120 cm) tall and 12 mm thick, weakly ridged and angled, equal coated to the stem n leaves alternate, sparse (especially upward), deeply pinnately lobed/divided, with cont with bloom occasional extensions along the rachis. Major veins more deeply depressed than on basal a leaves. nuous Toward wing top of the plant lobes get progressively fewer, longer, narrower, and more fully divided with few to no teeth: lobes are right angled to the midrib. Lobes are often deeply folded. Petiole/midrib has a shallow is offset by light color. Inflorescence racemes 10-14" (25-36 cm) long, the tips crowded and umbel-like. groove evenly spaced pedicels at maturity. Flowers (late spring to early summer) to 0.7 (18 mm) across, with right yellow petals with distinct veins, especially beneath. The base is a tubular calyx with 4 stiff-hairy triangular at the tip. Pods long and narrow, curved, roundish, to 3" (8 cm) long with a flattened beak. spreading 90° to the rachis on pedicels to 8 mm long. HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny, gravelly soil; especially roadsides Introduced. FOOD USE: All the tender parts can be eaten raw or cooked. from spring through early summer. This is one of the milder- flavored mustards. COMMENTS: This enigmatic species is abundant in Penn- sylvania but is almost never found anywhere else. However, since its spread in PA has been rapid, I'm assuming it will soon spread outside of that state. This is perhaps the most attractive of our weedy mustards, and one of the best for eating. too. It doesn have a common name here, but in the UK it goes by the eloquently beautiful (read with sarcasm) "Isle-of-Man Cabbage." I made up "highway mustard, which is not only accu- rate, but conveniently shorter than "Pennsyl vania-railroad-right-of- way cabbage." 415 