BOSSKOCEDE:
BASAL LEAVES LOBED PRESENT, LEAVES
OR DIVIDED, SAP ALTERNATE, NOT MILKY
amounts
39 Charlock mustard
2
too
Sinapis arvensis Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
pinnate QUICK CHECK: with Knee-high, bushy mustard with yellow Howers
dominant terminal lobe, uppermost leaves not lohr in il ID difficulty 1.
held DESCRIPTION: through Annual with large leaves concentrated at or near the base,
about half flowering. Basal leaves (and lowest stem leaves) 7-11" (18-28 some of them
to ovate as broad, with 2-3 small divisions near the base. The bulk of the leaf cm) long and
terminal section 5-8" (13-20 cm) long. The blade has scattered IS an elliptic
especially on the underside of the veins, The surface above is corrugated needle-hairs, by depressed veins and
Margins have broad, blunt, irregular teeth and shallow lobes. Midrib veinlets has
a small channel on top and is bluntly keeled below. Stems erect. 2-3 (60-
90 cm) tall, roundish but grooved, usually hollow, densely covered with
downward-pointing needle-hairs at the base (becoming sparser toward the
top). Branches spreading widely, sweeping upward, with purplish coloration
at the junctures. Upper leaves broadly triangular, coarsely toothed but not
lobed, sessile. Inflorescence a branching cluster of racemes, open flowers
equaling or exceeding the unopened buds. Flowers (summer) 10-12 mm
across, the petals yellow, not touching, narrowed at the base, nearly round.
Pods 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long and up to 3 mm thick, rod-like, with tapered beaks
about 40% of their length, at maturity slightly constricted between the dozen
or 50 seeds, the pods leaning strongly toward the rachis but not appressed,
on pedicels 10% of pod length.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Wild radish has thicker pods with larger seed buiges.
HABITAT: Gardens, agricultural fields, building sites, other disturbed soil.
Probably introduced.
FOOD USE: Gather all tender parts-young leaves, stem tips, and flower
bud clusters-in spring or early summer (occasionally fall). All parts can
be eaten raw or cooked, and have a pungent flavor.
COMMENTS: A common weed in many areas, not quite as mild as field mus-
tard in flavor, nor as hot as black mustard, but also good. AKA Brassica kaber
BOSSKOCEDE: BASAL LEAVES LOBED PRESENT, LEAVES OR DIVIDED, SAP ALTERNATE, NOT MILKY amounts 39 Charlock mustard 2 too Sinapis arvensis Brassicaceae (Mustard family) pinnate QUICK CHECK: with Knee-high, bushy mustard with yellow Howers dominant terminal lobe, uppermost leaves not lohr in il ID difficulty 1. held DESCRIPTION: through Annual with large leaves concentrated at or near the base, about half flowering. Basal leaves (and lowest stem leaves) 7-11" (18-28 some of them to ovate as broad, with 2-3 small divisions near the base. The bulk of the leaf cm) long and terminal section 5-8" (13-20 cm) long. The blade has scattered IS an elliptic especially on the underside of the veins, The surface above is corrugated needle-hairs, by depressed veins and Margins have broad, blunt, irregular teeth and shallow lobes. Midrib veinlets has a small channel on top and is bluntly keeled below. Stems erect. 2-3 (60- 90 cm) tall, roundish but grooved, usually hollow, densely covered with downward-pointing needle-hairs at the base (becoming sparser toward the top). Branches spreading widely, sweeping upward, with purplish coloration at the junctures. Upper leaves broadly triangular, coarsely toothed but not lobed, sessile. Inflorescence a branching cluster of racemes, open flowers equaling or exceeding the unopened buds. Flowers (summer) 10-12 mm across, the petals yellow, not touching, narrowed at the base, nearly round. Pods 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long and up to 3 mm thick, rod-like, with tapered beaks about 40% of their length, at maturity slightly constricted between the dozen or 50 seeds, the pods leaning strongly toward the rachis but not appressed, on pedicels 10% of pod length. CONFUSING PLANTS: Wild radish has thicker pods with larger seed buiges. HABITAT: Gardens, agricultural fields, building sites, other disturbed soil. Probably introduced. FOOD USE: Gather all tender parts-young leaves, stem tips, and flower bud clusters-in spring or early summer (occasionally fall). All parts can be eaten raw or cooked, and have a pungent flavor. COMMENTS: A common weed in many areas, not quite as mild as field mus- tard in flavor, nor as hot as black mustard, but also good. AKA Brassica kaber 