LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
LOBED BASAL OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
38 French
Erucastrum rocket gallicum 2 Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
( HECK: Knee high mustard with long, pinnately compound-lobed 1. leaves; yellow
QUICK and loose racemes of very thin pods. ID difficulty
flowers winter annual. Basal leaves in a rosette of 3-7, persisting Lobes blunt- until
DESCRIPTION: Annual cm) or long with 9-17 deeply cut pinnate lobes, ruffled. lobed again. Sinuses
early bloom, 4-7 (10-18 with large blunt teeth; longer lobes are pinnately few small, simple
tipped, longer distally, proximally, and near the base of the rachis there are a and depressed
become deeper divided. The upper surface has scattered, stiff, appressed hairs thick, often
Distribution
lobes fully veins. Midribs often purplish. Stems 12-28" (30-70 cm) long, 3-5 mm few widely-
very sporadic.
major covered with appressed hairs, roundish to slightly angled, with a
spreading, leaning, densely ascending branches. Stem leaves become smaller toward the top with fewer lobes, a but long these are
proportionately longer and more deeply cut. Inflorescence raceme
rising well above the leaves, the open flowers clustered tightly at the tip,
lengthening greatly in fruit so the pods are widely spaced. There is a tiny,
pinnately-lobed leaf at the base of most pedicels. Flowers (summer to fall)
6-9 mm wide with 4 yellow to white petals, the base narrow and stalk-like,
the spreading tips fan-like or obovate. The 4 narrow sepals are purple at
the base shading to yellow at the tip. Pods uniform in thickness, 1-1.3"
(25-33 mm) long, rod-like, with a beaked tip, ascending but not pressed
to the rachis, on pedicels 30% of their length. Seeds oval and red-brown.
HABITAT: Disturbed, dry, sunny ground: crop fields, roadsides, construc-
tion sites, lakeshores, waste areas. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Tender leaves and stem tips can be eaten raw or cooked;
they are moderately hot.
COMMENTS: At a glance this looks like a Brassica, but the tiny lobed
leaves subtending the pedicels distinguish it from all other mustards in
our area. This mustard is pretty good, but being short and hairy makes it
prone to being dirty. AKA dog mustard, hairy rocket.
416
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LOBED BASAL OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY 38 French Erucastrum rocket gallicum 2 Brassicaceae (Mustard family) ( HECK: Knee high mustard with long, pinnately compound-lobed 1. leaves; yellow QUICK and loose racemes of very thin pods. ID difficulty flowers winter annual. Basal leaves in a rosette of 3-7, persisting Lobes blunt- until DESCRIPTION: Annual cm) or long with 9-17 deeply cut pinnate lobes, ruffled. lobed again. Sinuses early bloom, 4-7 (10-18 with large blunt teeth; longer lobes are pinnately few small, simple tipped, longer distally, proximally, and near the base of the rachis there are a and depressed become deeper divided. The upper surface has scattered, stiff, appressed hairs thick, often Distribution lobes fully veins. Midribs often purplish. Stems 12-28" (30-70 cm) long, 3-5 mm few widely- very sporadic. major covered with appressed hairs, roundish to slightly angled, with a spreading, leaning, densely ascending branches. Stem leaves become smaller toward the top with fewer lobes, a but long these are proportionately longer and more deeply cut. Inflorescence raceme rising well above the leaves, the open flowers clustered tightly at the tip, lengthening greatly in fruit so the pods are widely spaced. There is a tiny, pinnately-lobed leaf at the base of most pedicels. Flowers (summer to fall) 6-9 mm wide with 4 yellow to white petals, the base narrow and stalk-like, the spreading tips fan-like or obovate. The 4 narrow sepals are purple at the base shading to yellow at the tip. Pods uniform in thickness, 1-1.3" (25-33 mm) long, rod-like, with a beaked tip, ascending but not pressed to the rachis, on pedicels 30% of their length. Seeds oval and red-brown. HABITAT: Disturbed, dry, sunny ground: crop fields, roadsides, construc- tion sites, lakeshores, waste areas. Introduced. FOOD USE: Tender leaves and stem tips can be eaten raw or cooked; they are moderately hot. COMMENTS: At a glance this looks like a Brassica, but the tiny lobed leaves subtending the pedicels distinguish it from all other mustards in our area. This mustard is pretty good, but being short and hairy makes it prone to being dirty. AKA dog mustard, hairy rocket. 416 