BASAL ONCE LEAVES PRESENT,
COMPOUND WITH LEAVES ALTERNATETS
GROUP 26 BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
ONCE COMPOUND WITH DISTINCT LEAFLETS
Group There 26 are includes 7 plants two good root vegetables, and the rest are leaf and stem
easy Members of this family can be distinguished from other very
to identify. here from the carrot family Apiaceae, of which a few vegetables are
O1 group 26 by their jointed stems. However, Cherokee swamp potato members IS
the trickiest edibies in North America and is certainly not for beginners. one Some of
aquatic plants will key here if their water has dried up; check group 15 if in doubt
The 5 members of the mustard family Brassicaceae can be a little tricky to tell from
each other, but there are no dangerous plants in this family. I would rather have
included false strawberry next to the true wild strawberries, but in keeping with the
premise of the book 1 had to place it where its physical form indicated.
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 26
The key is not your final answer!
Basal leaves with 3 leaflets.
Leaflets more than 12" (30 CM) long, deeply and erratically lobed.
Stem lacking raised purple dots; по ring of hairs at the nodes.
1. Cow parsnip
or
Stem with raised purple dots; a ring of hairs at the nodes.
2. Giant hogweed
or
Leaflets less than 5" long.
Leaflets erratically needle-toothed and lobed, hairless; major veins flat above.
3. Mitsuba
Leaflets unlobed, hairy, broad-toothed; veins depressed; stems trailing.
13. False strawberry
Leaflets unlobed, faintly hairy, entire to minutely toothed; the petiole base has wing-like stipules.
14. Red clover
Basal leaves palmately compound with 3-7 sessile, hairless leaflets.
4. Sanicle (5 species)
or
Basal leaves pinnately compound, some with more than 3 leaflets.
AN leaflets distinctly less than 1" (2.5 cm) long.
Petiole long, sinuous, mostly naked with ridiculously widely spaced leaflets.
8. Cuckoo flower
Petiole just normal and mostly straight, with non-ridiculous leaflet spacing.
15. Small-flower phacelia
Leaflets sharp-pointed, entire, with stiff, leaning hairs.
or
Leaflets of basal leaves blunt to rounded, never deeply lobed; hairless or soft-hairy.
9. Shetweed
or
Plant of uplands; leaf margins faintly hairy; vertical pods shoot seeds.
or
10. Pennsylvania cress
Plant of wetlands; leaves hairless: erect pods not exploding.
Leaflets of basal leaves often or usually deeply lobed.
11. Narrow-leaf bittercress
Stems erect, usually more than 14" (36 cm) tall.
12. Twin cress
Stems prostrate to decumbent, less than 14" (36 cm).
flets cleariy larger than 1" (2.5 cm) long.
17. Chocolate root
Some side leaflets much, much smaller than the terminal one(s).
Side leaflets almost as large as the terminal leaflet.
5. Cherokee swamp potato
Leaves hairless; leaflets lanceolate with no teeth or a few large ones.
Leaves hairy. at least lightly (check leaf underside); leaflets erratically toothed/lobed. and
Leaflet always deeply lobed, dark-speckled when young: young stem purplish
16. Purple phacelia
densely long-hairy.
Leaflet sometimes deeply lobed, lobes blunt: stem sparsely soft-short-hairy.
6. Parsnip
strongly Leaflet (basal) ridged/angled. toothed but not lobed (upper deeply lobed); stem finely ridged and
7. Burnet-saxifrage
densely stiff-short-hairy.
419
BASAL ONCE LEAVES PRESENT, COMPOUND WITH LEAVES ALTERNATETS GROUP 26 BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, ONCE COMPOUND WITH DISTINCT LEAFLETS Group There 26 are includes 7 plants two good root vegetables, and the rest are leaf and stem easy Members of this family can be distinguished from other very to identify. here from the carrot family Apiaceae, of which a few vegetables are O1 group 26 by their jointed stems. However, Cherokee swamp potato members IS the trickiest edibies in North America and is certainly not for beginners. one Some of aquatic plants will key here if their water has dried up; check group 15 if in doubt The 5 members of the mustard family Brassicaceae can be a little tricky to tell from each other, but there are no dangerous plants in this family. I would rather have included false strawberry next to the true wild strawberries, but in keeping with the premise of the book 1 had to place it where its physical form indicated. TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 26 The key is not your final answer! Basal leaves with 3 leaflets. Leaflets more than 12" (30 CM) long, deeply and erratically lobed. Stem lacking raised purple dots; по ring of hairs at the nodes. 1. Cow parsnip or Stem with raised purple dots; a ring of hairs at the nodes. 2. Giant hogweed or Leaflets less than 5" long. Leaflets erratically needle-toothed and lobed, hairless; major veins flat above. 3. Mitsuba Leaflets unlobed, hairy, broad-toothed; veins depressed; stems trailing. 13. False strawberry Leaflets unlobed, faintly hairy, entire to minutely toothed; the petiole base has wing-like stipules. 14. Red clover Basal leaves palmately compound with 3-7 sessile, hairless leaflets. 4. Sanicle (5 species) or Basal leaves pinnately compound, some with more than 3 leaflets. AN leaflets distinctly less than 1" (2.5 cm) long. Petiole long, sinuous, mostly naked with ridiculously widely spaced leaflets. 8. Cuckoo flower Petiole just normal and mostly straight, with non-ridiculous leaflet spacing. 15. Small-flower phacelia Leaflets sharp-pointed, entire, with stiff, leaning hairs. or Leaflets of basal leaves blunt to rounded, never deeply lobed; hairless or soft-hairy. 9. Shetweed or Plant of uplands; leaf margins faintly hairy; vertical pods shoot seeds. or 10. Pennsylvania cress Plant of wetlands; leaves hairless: erect pods not exploding. Leaflets of basal leaves often or usually deeply lobed. 11. Narrow-leaf bittercress Stems erect, usually more than 14" (36 cm) tall. 12. Twin cress Stems prostrate to decumbent, less than 14" (36 cm). flets cleariy larger than 1" (2.5 cm) long. 17. Chocolate root Some side leaflets much, much smaller than the terminal one(s). Side leaflets almost as large as the terminal leaflet. 5. Cherokee swamp potato Leaves hairless; leaflets lanceolate with no teeth or a few large ones. Leaves hairy. at least lightly (check leaf underside); leaflets erratically toothed/lobed. and Leaflet always deeply lobed, dark-speckled when young: young stem purplish 16. Purple phacelia densely long-hairy. Leaflet sometimes deeply lobed, lobes blunt: stem sparsely soft-short-hairy. 6. Parsnip strongly Leaflet (basal) ridged/angled. toothed but not lobed (upper deeply lobed); stem finely ridged and 7. Burnet-saxifrage densely stiff-short-hairy. 419 