LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
BASAL LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY
4° Wild radish
2
3
Brassicaceae but IWE-415 (Mustard family)
Raphanus raphanistrum
Summer-blooming mustard with light yellow flowers; difficulty leaning 1. stems
QUICK needle-like CHECK: hairs; pods deeply constricted between seeds. ID
with Annual, the rosette persisting to flowering. Basal leaves increasing up to 10" (25 in cm) size
DESCRIPTION: the lower ones smaller and nearly or fully divided, Both surfaces
toward the stiff, needle-like hairs. Veins and veinlets are strongly depressed
long with pinnate end of lobes, the leaf, with a large terminal lobe that is longer than wide. above.
have scattered, of blade length, channeled and winged. Stems typically multiple, spreading bloom-coated. from Branches the base,
Petioles to 20-40% (8o cm), with scattered needle-like hairs and faint ridges, the surface the volume
leaning, few and 32" at broad angles. Lower stem leaves have fewer lobes, with almost all contained in
the are terminal segment. Upper stem leaves are elongated and pointed with scattered large teeth but typically
no lobes. Inflorescence long, sparse, terminal racemes. Flowers (summer) 0.6-0.7" (15-18 mm) across with
4 green sepals and 4 veiny yellow petals that are widest at the tip, on pedicels 0.5-1" (13-25 mm) long. Pods 2-3"
(5-8cm) long and 4-6 mm wide, curved, deeply constricted between the seeds, the tips forming long, tapered
beaks. The pods do not split open at maturity: The constrictions become more pronounced and the surface
becomes ridged, and when dry they break into sections containing one elliptic, light brown seed 3 mm long.
HABITAT: Agricultural fields, gardens, disturbed ground. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Eat the tender parts of clean, vigorous plants from late spring to mid summer, raw or cooked.
They have a hot, radish-like flavor. The immature pods make a nice vegetable for salads or stir fry.
COMMENTS: The needle-like hairs of this species are among the most formidable on any of our mustards.
Literature and herbarium records regarding this species are unreliable due to frequent confusion with feral rad-
ish R. sativus, which is much less common in our region
and has purple or purple-veined petals and shorter,
stouter pods. I have not found enlarged roots on either
species, but in some climates this is reported to occur.
Pods of R. sativus.
Flowers of K. sativus
418
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, BASAL LOBED OR DIVIDED, SAP NOT MILKY 4° Wild radish 2 3 Brassicaceae but IWE-415 (Mustard family) Raphanus raphanistrum Summer-blooming mustard with light yellow flowers; difficulty leaning 1. stems QUICK needle-like CHECK: hairs; pods deeply constricted between seeds. ID with Annual, the rosette persisting to flowering. Basal leaves increasing up to 10" (25 in cm) size DESCRIPTION: the lower ones smaller and nearly or fully divided, Both surfaces toward the stiff, needle-like hairs. Veins and veinlets are strongly depressed long with pinnate end of lobes, the leaf, with a large terminal lobe that is longer than wide. above. have scattered, of blade length, channeled and winged. Stems typically multiple, spreading bloom-coated. from Branches the base, Petioles to 20-40% (8o cm), with scattered needle-like hairs and faint ridges, the surface the volume leaning, few and 32" at broad angles. Lower stem leaves have fewer lobes, with almost all contained in the are terminal segment. Upper stem leaves are elongated and pointed with scattered large teeth but typically no lobes. Inflorescence long, sparse, terminal racemes. Flowers (summer) 0.6-0.7" (15-18 mm) across with 4 green sepals and 4 veiny yellow petals that are widest at the tip, on pedicels 0.5-1" (13-25 mm) long. Pods 2-3" (5-8cm) long and 4-6 mm wide, curved, deeply constricted between the seeds, the tips forming long, tapered beaks. The pods do not split open at maturity: The constrictions become more pronounced and the surface becomes ridged, and when dry they break into sections containing one elliptic, light brown seed 3 mm long. HABITAT: Agricultural fields, gardens, disturbed ground. Introduced. FOOD USE: Eat the tender parts of clean, vigorous plants from late spring to mid summer, raw or cooked. They have a hot, radish-like flavor. The immature pods make a nice vegetable for salads or stir fry. COMMENTS: The needle-like hairs of this species are among the most formidable on any of our mustards. Literature and herbarium records regarding this species are unreliable due to frequent confusion with feral rad- ish R. sativus, which is much less common in our region and has purple or purple-veined petals and shorter, stouter pods. I have not found enlarged roots on either species, but in some climates this is reported to occur. Pods of R. sativus. Flowers of K. sativus 418 