BASAL ONCE COMPOUND WITH DISTINCT LEAFLETS
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
3
2
2
1
NG-365
1.
Heracleum lanatum 1 Apiaceae (Carrot family)
Cow parsnip
Enormous hairv herb with stout stems and giant 3-part compound ID difficulty leaves, 1.
each QUICK leatter CHECK: deeply lohed: broad. flat-topped umbels of white flowers.
DESCRIPTION: Very large perennial. Basal leaves compound with 3 leaflets, none irregularly sessile,
12-20" (30-50 cm) long, ruffled, hairy, deeply palmately lobed, the margins depressed
toothed each and lobed, the teeth broad with sharp tips. Veins and veinlets deeply
above, giving a corrugated appearance. When young the leaves are deeply folded or pleated. lined
Petiole to 28" (70 cm) long and 1.2" (3 cm) thick, hollow, round, faintly ridged and lengthwise, hairy in
varying density, but the hair always stiff and erect; the base is a large sheath. Stems 4-8' (1.2-2.4 m) tall and
0.7-1,8" (18-46 mm) thick, round, hollow, jointed, erect-hairy, with few branches (and these only toward the
top). Both stems and petioles have skin that is green, purple, or a mixture of the two. Stem leaves alternate, few,
smaller toward the top, on progressively shorter petioles-the uppermost have no petiole beyond the very
large sheath. Inflorescence flat-topped compound umbels up to 10" (25 cm) across, the rays and pedicels ridged,
hollow, and hairy; the umbellets not touching but the flowers within them crowded. Flowers (late spring to
early summer) 5-7 mm across with 5 white, 2-lobed, asymmetrical petals of varying size, the largest petal many
times bigger than the smallest. Fruit thin, flat, 5-9 mm long, ripening to light brown with 4 darker brown streaks,
oval with the tip notched and the edges sharp, splitting into 2 flat sections each with one seed; highly aromatic.
HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in full sun to partial shade. Roadside ditches, wet forest edges, clearings, swamps,
lakeshores, streamsides, and especially floodplain forests. Native.
FOOD USE: Roots can be collected when the tops are dormant; they are powerfully spicy and most people
find them too strong except as a seasoning. Gather tender, young stalks and petioles in spring or early sum-
mer before fully formed (well before flowering). Peel and eat raw or cooked like celery in stew. Young leaves
(early to mid spring) can be cooked or fermented. Flower bud clusters, along with their enclosing sheath (late
spring) can be used sparingly in salads or to flavor various cooked dishes. The fruits/seeds can be gathered
from mid to late summer to use as a seasoning. Conservation 2.
WARNING: Phototoxic juice-do not get it on your skin! (See p. 23.) (Continued on the next page.)
BASAL ONCE COMPOUND WITH DISTINCT LEAFLETS LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, 3 2 2 1 NG-365 1. Heracleum lanatum 1 Apiaceae (Carrot family) Cow parsnip Enormous hairv herb with stout stems and giant 3-part compound ID difficulty leaves, 1. each QUICK leatter CHECK: deeply lohed: broad. flat-topped umbels of white flowers. DESCRIPTION: Very large perennial. Basal leaves compound with 3 leaflets, none irregularly sessile, 12-20" (30-50 cm) long, ruffled, hairy, deeply palmately lobed, the margins depressed toothed each and lobed, the teeth broad with sharp tips. Veins and veinlets deeply above, giving a corrugated appearance. When young the leaves are deeply folded or pleated. lined Petiole to 28" (70 cm) long and 1.2" (3 cm) thick, hollow, round, faintly ridged and lengthwise, hairy in varying density, but the hair always stiff and erect; the base is a large sheath. Stems 4-8' (1.2-2.4 m) tall and 0.7-1,8" (18-46 mm) thick, round, hollow, jointed, erect-hairy, with few branches (and these only toward the top). Both stems and petioles have skin that is green, purple, or a mixture of the two. Stem leaves alternate, few, smaller toward the top, on progressively shorter petioles-the uppermost have no petiole beyond the very large sheath. Inflorescence flat-topped compound umbels up to 10" (25 cm) across, the rays and pedicels ridged, hollow, and hairy; the umbellets not touching but the flowers within them crowded. Flowers (late spring to early summer) 5-7 mm across with 5 white, 2-lobed, asymmetrical petals of varying size, the largest petal many times bigger than the smallest. Fruit thin, flat, 5-9 mm long, ripening to light brown with 4 darker brown streaks, oval with the tip notched and the edges sharp, splitting into 2 flat sections each with one seed; highly aromatic. HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in full sun to partial shade. Roadside ditches, wet forest edges, clearings, swamps, lakeshores, streamsides, and especially floodplain forests. Native. FOOD USE: Roots can be collected when the tops are dormant; they are powerfully spicy and most people find them too strong except as a seasoning. Gather tender, young stalks and petioles in spring or early sum- mer before fully formed (well before flowering). Peel and eat raw or cooked like celery in stew. Young leaves (early to mid spring) can be cooked or fermented. Flower bud clusters, along with their enclosing sheath (late spring) can be used sparingly in salads or to flavor various cooked dishes. The fruits/seeds can be gathered from mid to late summer to use as a seasoning. Conservation 2. WARNING: Phototoxic juice-do not get it on your skin! (See p. 23.) (Continued on the next page.) 