procede (Carrot family
BASAL ONCE LEAVES PRESENT,
COMPOUND WITH LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS
too
COMMENTS:
The
of
are
strong
and
been
traditionally
used
and
Asia
The
Russian
generally
for
vegetable
to a soupimade from the formanted
pean hog Need Our nativernew partnin
decline from herbir spraying by people
that anything looking remotely like giant 11
must die European hogweed H sphood plann
occasionally found as an escape
leaves usually have 5 leaflets rat
leaves and petioles are not as tender as
species, but are similarly edible
Related edible:
2
Giant hogweed
Heracleum mantegazzianum
An exotic invasive that has been subject to intense eradication efforts, this plant has received
much media attention for its phototoxic juice. It is similar to COW parsnip but larger in all
respects, the stems reaching 14' (4 m) tall and the leaves 5' (1.5 m) across. Stems have
numerous maroon dots or blotches and are encircled by a thick beard of stiff whitish hairs at
each node. Leaflets deeply incised, in places fully or almost to the midrib (especially in the
terminal leaflet) and the narrow lobes have long, tapered points. The blades are glossy and
hairless or nearly so underneath. Tender young growth of this species can be eaten like that
of cow parsnip. (I have only eaten the petioles, but there is documentation for other above-ground parts as
food; the roots may not be edible.) WARNING: Phototoxic juice-do not get it on your skin (See C 23
Close of
giant hogwed
petiole snow
MOURH
ridge. purple
spots, and
needle hairs
421
procede (Carrot family BASAL ONCE LEAVES PRESENT, COMPOUND WITH LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS too COMMENTS: The of are strong and been traditionally used and Asia The Russian generally for vegetable to a soupimade from the formanted pean hog Need Our nativernew partnin decline from herbir spraying by people that anything looking remotely like giant 11 must die European hogweed H sphood plann occasionally found as an escape leaves usually have 5 leaflets rat leaves and petioles are not as tender as species, but are similarly edible Related edible: 2 Giant hogweed Heracleum mantegazzianum An exotic invasive that has been subject to intense eradication efforts, this plant has received much media attention for its phototoxic juice. It is similar to COW parsnip but larger in all respects, the stems reaching 14' (4 m) tall and the leaves 5' (1.5 m) across. Stems have numerous maroon dots or blotches and are encircled by a thick beard of stiff whitish hairs at each node. Leaflets deeply incised, in places fully or almost to the midrib (especially in the terminal leaflet) and the narrow lobes have long, tapered points. The blades are glossy and hairless or nearly so underneath. Tender young growth of this species can be eaten like that of cow parsnip. (I have only eaten the petioles, but there is documentation for other above-ground parts as food; the roots may not be edible.) WARNING: Phototoxic juice-do not get it on your skin (See C 23 Close of giant hogwed petiole snow MOURH ridge. purple spots, and needle hairs 421 