PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS
BASAL ONCE COMPOUND LEAVES WITH DISTINCT
Mitsuba canadensis 2 2 4 3 Apiaceae (Carrot family) widens at
QUICK Cryptotaenia CHECK: Plant hairless, leaves ternately white, compound; on very unequal channeled pedicels. petiole ID difficulty the 3.
base to wrap around Perennial the stem; herb, flowers all parts tiny, hairless, the the side roots leaflets thin and normally whitish sessile, with major cm) the
lobes; terminal branches. long. DESCRIPTION: narrowed side often Basal leaflets on at leaves the a usually short base one 3-11, petiolule side. and have ternately broad Midvein 2. Lobes with toward compound, upturned, and are abruptly secondary the tip. tapering Terminal pointed. veins wings. are leaflets Sinuses the raised Leaflets glossy usually are above; underside. sometimes 2-4" have the (5-10 veinlets 3 major Margins cut are slightly double-toothed depressed
above fully to (scarcely the midvein lobes; SO on on the the youngest teeth are leaves). very sharp, All claw-tipped, veins protrude and on point translucent-edged forward. Petioles sheath; 1.5-3 times above the that length the
and have small with a broad, glossy, 40" m) tall and
of the terminal leaflet, the lower third wide, or so with a small hollow. Stems usually single, to with fine 11 lines. mm
petiole solid is not or channeled, with a pinhole deeper hollow, than jointed, the surface smooth, hairless, far up the and petiole. light green, Terminal leaflets are
thick, toward the top, with wings extending to lanceolate leaflets
Stem leaves alternate, decurrent sparser and saw-toothed. Upper leaves have much narrower ovate compound umbels with
sessile, the base narrower teeth, and long-pointed tips. Inflorescence terminal in the second, with
3-5 no bracts unequal at either rays level. Flowers (early summer) 3-4 mm across with 5 white petals. a tiny,
with few to no lobes, at the first juncture and 5-11 unequal and narrowly spreading pedicels Fruit shaped like
stout banana, turning brown and splitting in two in late summer.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Sanicle leaves are usually more palmate with all leaflets sessile and often cut fully to
the base; major veins of mature leaves are more depressed. In flower or fruit, differences are quite evident.
Most buttercup leaves are either hairy, have blunt teeth, or have depressed major veins.
HABITAT: Rich, lightly disturbed soil in full to partial shade; mostly hardwood forests, especially in valleys
or floodplains and on lower slopes. Native.
FOOD USE: Roots are good but tiny. Leaves can be cooked as a potherb or used to flavor vegetable broth;
they are best in spring and fall. The spring shoots make a delectable vegetable and can be steamed or boiled
by themselves and served like asparagus, or they can be eaten raw. They make a superb ingredient in soups
and casseroles. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: This abundant native herb is not as popular as it
deserves to be, partly because it is one of our trickier plants to
recognize. It is well worth the effort-and the most confusing spe-
cies, the sanicles, are related and similarly edible. This species or
a very close relative (taxonomists disagree) is native to eastern
Asia, In Japan it is a popular cultivated vegetable; the name mitsuba
means "three leaves" in Japanese. AKA honewort, wild chervil.
PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS BASAL ONCE COMPOUND LEAVES WITH DISTINCT Mitsuba canadensis 2 2 4 3 Apiaceae (Carrot family) widens at QUICK Cryptotaenia CHECK: Plant hairless, leaves ternately white, compound; on very unequal channeled pedicels. petiole ID difficulty the 3. base to wrap around Perennial the stem; herb, flowers all parts tiny, hairless, the the side roots leaflets thin and normally whitish sessile, with major cm) the lobes; terminal branches. long. DESCRIPTION: narrowed side often Basal leaflets on at leaves the a usually short base one 3-11, petiolule side. and have ternately broad Midvein 2. Lobes with toward compound, upturned, and are abruptly secondary the tip. tapering Terminal pointed. veins wings. are leaflets Sinuses the raised Leaflets glossy usually are above; underside. sometimes 2-4" have the (5-10 veinlets 3 major Margins cut are slightly double-toothed depressed above fully to (scarcely the midvein lobes; SO on on the the youngest teeth are leaves). very sharp, All claw-tipped, veins protrude and on point translucent-edged forward. Petioles sheath; 1.5-3 times above the that length the and have small with a broad, glossy, 40" m) tall and of the terminal leaflet, the lower third wide, or so with a small hollow. Stems usually single, to with fine 11 lines. mm petiole solid is not or channeled, with a pinhole deeper hollow, than jointed, the surface smooth, hairless, far up the and petiole. light green, Terminal leaflets are thick, toward the top, with wings extending to lanceolate leaflets Stem leaves alternate, decurrent sparser and saw-toothed. Upper leaves have much narrower ovate compound umbels with sessile, the base narrower teeth, and long-pointed tips. Inflorescence terminal in the second, with 3-5 no bracts unequal at either rays level. Flowers (early summer) 3-4 mm across with 5 white petals. a tiny, with few to no lobes, at the first juncture and 5-11 unequal and narrowly spreading pedicels Fruit shaped like stout banana, turning brown and splitting in two in late summer. CONFUSING PLANTS: Sanicle leaves are usually more palmate with all leaflets sessile and often cut fully to the base; major veins of mature leaves are more depressed. In flower or fruit, differences are quite evident. Most buttercup leaves are either hairy, have blunt teeth, or have depressed major veins. HABITAT: Rich, lightly disturbed soil in full to partial shade; mostly hardwood forests, especially in valleys or floodplains and on lower slopes. Native. FOOD USE: Roots are good but tiny. Leaves can be cooked as a potherb or used to flavor vegetable broth; they are best in spring and fall. The spring shoots make a delectable vegetable and can be steamed or boiled by themselves and served like asparagus, or they can be eaten raw. They make a superb ingredient in soups and casseroles. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: This abundant native herb is not as popular as it deserves to be, partly because it is one of our trickier plants to recognize. It is well worth the effort-and the most confusing spe- cies, the sanicles, are related and similarly edible. This species or a very close relative (taxonomists disagree) is native to eastern Asia, In Japan it is a popular cultivated vegetable; the name mitsuba means "three leaves" in Japanese. AKA honewort, wild chervil. 