mm
)
1cm
BASAL ONCE
SEAVES ACT LEAPLETS
4
Sanicle
2
2
genus Sanicula Apiaceae (Carrot family)
ICK CHECK: Smooth, hairless knee-high plants with palmately compound
burs. ID difficulty 3.
of 3-7 leaflets; compound umbels with few rays, the tiny umbellets backed with sessile logun.
DESCRIPTION: Perennlals or biennials with little scent, all parts hairless and without bloom
often with multiple root crowns in close proximity. Basal leaves in clumps or rosettes
often gone by blooming, palmately divided into 3-7 sessile leaflets (the outer sometimes not
fully divided). Older leaves are dark, dull, and flat; new leaves are light green, glossy, and
ruffled. Leaflets lanceolate or oblanceolate, tapered to both ends, pointed, coarsely and
Collective
singe
irregularly toothed and occasionally lobed, with acuminate, bristle-tipped, for ward-pointing teeth (Sometimes
the first spring leaves are obovate or fan-like.) Veins and veinlets are lightly depressed above and orotrude
below-even more so on new leaves. Petioles long and narrow, limp or rigid, 2-3 mm thick, ereo or ascending.
solid, several times longer than the blades, maroon near the base, green above, channeled and sheathing n
the lower 2" (5 cm) or so, (the outer ones more broadly so). Above the sheath, the cross section is channeled
or round with a small flat area on top and 2 tiny wings. Stems one to few per rosette, solid, round, hardess
jointed, erect or leaning, 12-30" (30-75 cm) tall and 4-8 mm thick, almost smooth, but with numerous bunt
ridges becoming more prominent toward the top, forking at about 70° a few times in the upper half. with long,
straight sections between forks. Stem leaves reduced in size upward, with very short sheathing petioles, corge
mostly at forks in the stem. Inflorescence a few compound umbels, terminal or from
upper leaf axils. The primary rays are few (usually 2-3) and often unequal in length; the
umbellets are compact, forming dense heads, often with two forms of flower. There are
commonly 3 sessile, bisexual bur-flowers, and a few to several much smaller, non-bristly,
male flowers on pedicels. Flowers 2-3 mm across with 5 white or dull yellowish petals
and 5 pointed sepals. Fruit is a compact bur 3-6 mm long, covered with hooked bristles.
SPECIES: There are 5 similar species in our region: S. canadensis, S. marilandica, S. odorata
(gregaria), S. trifoliata, and S. smallii. They taste similar (but not identical) and differentiat- here.
ing them when not in bloom is difficult, so I will lump them together for discussion
CONFUSING PLANTS: All species are easily confused with honewort Cryptotaenia
canadensis (also edible), especially S. trifoliata. The best differences are the two tiny
wings on the sanicle petiole, and its more deeply depressed veins.
HABITAT: Well-drained hardwood forests and savannahs, sunny openings, slopes,
borders, and trailsides. Native.
greens and shoots can be used as a vegetable raw but is or generally cooked,
FOOD USE: The and young early summer. The flavor varies between the species Conservation 2.
like mostly mitsuba in spring with a hint of cilantro and sometimes a slight bitterness.
(Continued on the next page.)
mm ) 1cm BASAL ONCE SEAVES ACT LEAPLETS 4 Sanicle 2 2 genus Sanicula Apiaceae (Carrot family) ICK CHECK: Smooth, hairless knee-high plants with palmately compound burs. ID difficulty 3. of 3-7 leaflets; compound umbels with few rays, the tiny umbellets backed with sessile logun. DESCRIPTION: Perennlals or biennials with little scent, all parts hairless and without bloom often with multiple root crowns in close proximity. Basal leaves in clumps or rosettes often gone by blooming, palmately divided into 3-7 sessile leaflets (the outer sometimes not fully divided). Older leaves are dark, dull, and flat; new leaves are light green, glossy, and ruffled. Leaflets lanceolate or oblanceolate, tapered to both ends, pointed, coarsely and Collective singe irregularly toothed and occasionally lobed, with acuminate, bristle-tipped, for ward-pointing teeth (Sometimes the first spring leaves are obovate or fan-like.) Veins and veinlets are lightly depressed above and orotrude below-even more so on new leaves. Petioles long and narrow, limp or rigid, 2-3 mm thick, ereo or ascending. solid, several times longer than the blades, maroon near the base, green above, channeled and sheathing n the lower 2" (5 cm) or so, (the outer ones more broadly so). Above the sheath, the cross section is channeled or round with a small flat area on top and 2 tiny wings. Stems one to few per rosette, solid, round, hardess jointed, erect or leaning, 12-30" (30-75 cm) tall and 4-8 mm thick, almost smooth, but with numerous bunt ridges becoming more prominent toward the top, forking at about 70° a few times in the upper half. with long, straight sections between forks. Stem leaves reduced in size upward, with very short sheathing petioles, corge mostly at forks in the stem. Inflorescence a few compound umbels, terminal or from upper leaf axils. The primary rays are few (usually 2-3) and often unequal in length; the umbellets are compact, forming dense heads, often with two forms of flower. There are commonly 3 sessile, bisexual bur-flowers, and a few to several much smaller, non-bristly, male flowers on pedicels. Flowers 2-3 mm across with 5 white or dull yellowish petals and 5 pointed sepals. Fruit is a compact bur 3-6 mm long, covered with hooked bristles. SPECIES: There are 5 similar species in our region: S. canadensis, S. marilandica, S. odorata (gregaria), S. trifoliata, and S. smallii. They taste similar (but not identical) and differentiat- here. ing them when not in bloom is difficult, so I will lump them together for discussion CONFUSING PLANTS: All species are easily confused with honewort Cryptotaenia canadensis (also edible), especially S. trifoliata. The best differences are the two tiny wings on the sanicle petiole, and its more deeply depressed veins. HABITAT: Well-drained hardwood forests and savannahs, sunny openings, slopes, borders, and trailsides. Native. greens and shoots can be used as a vegetable raw but is or generally cooked, FOOD USE: The and young early summer. The flavor varies between the species Conservation 2. like mostly mitsuba in spring with a hint of cilantro and sometimes a slight bitterness. (Continued on the next page.) 