mm
0
1cm
BASAL ONCE LEAVES PRESENT,
COMPOUND WITH LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS
the leaflets pound distal occasionally side, Midveins have are short not depressed. petiolules. The Leaflets rachis are is often highly asymmetric with blade
the peduncle umbels, round, one to smooth, a few, terminal thin, to or 9" from (23 upper cm) long, branches deeper in than axils wide of reduced and channeled. leaves with inflorescer a clasning it the
0-2 fl +-topped linear, drooping, in shade but become hemispheric in full sun, Great the umbels 3-8" across, may r
mostly well needle-tipped bracts with inrolled margins. rays rounded. Umbellets 1.5-5" long, subti
early fall) separated, subtended by 1-5 tiny, short, thread-thin bracts (hard 7-21, 8" (13 20 mm
the sharp petal on thread-thin tips incurved curved pedicels, not touching, 4 mm across, green in to the see) center Flowers with (late whit ;//
almost touch making them look short and blunt. Petals roughly size and 1
each other. Fruit dry upon maturity, 3-4 mm long, oval, flattened, are sharp equal edged. in
similar CONFUSING SPECIES: Common water hemlock Cicuta maculata (p. 668) may share its habitat. and
and far at a glance, but has regularly serrated leaf margins and multi-compound leaves with smaller
more of them. The secondary veins are numerous, straight at first, and deeply depressed. T
of water hemlock are entirely dissimilar. Bulblet water hemlock Cicuta bulbifera (p. 670) IS mostly
and has multi-compound leaves with exclusively narrow leaflets, and bulblets in upper leaf axils. All
springwater parsnip (p. 216) and water parsnip (p. 213), both edible.
HABITAT: Seepages, ponds margins, marshes, wet meadows and stream edges, in rich, high-calc
Grows in shade to full sun, but larger in sun. Native.
WARNING: This is one of the three plants in this book that I consider the most likely for
tification. Proceed with great caution!
FOOD USE: The tubers can be used as a potato-like vegetable, best gathered from fall through spri
are fantastic in any way you'd use a potato. Take a couple and replant the crown. Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: Probably my favorite root vegetable: like a
potato with a faint hint of carrot, but with a better texture
and flavor than either. Widely and erroneously reported as
poisonous to livestock; the name results from confusion with
water hemlock. This vegetable, almost completely unknown
to modern foragers, was eaten by the Cherokee (and probably
many Native nations in our region) but its food tradition has
been hanging by a thread for a century. Although you will find
it listed as deadly poisonous in many sources, this is nonsense.
I grow this vegetable, eat it as often as I can, and feed it to my
guests, who have universally found it excellent. This is what
the colonial destruction of food knowledge looks like. I have
not listed the shoots or greens as edible due to the lack of eth-
nographic information, but they are not poisonous. There are
other species in this genus, the edibility of which are unknown
to me. AKA stiff cowbane, pig potato.
Leaflets may be entire or toothed.
mm 0 1cm BASAL ONCE LEAVES PRESENT, COMPOUND WITH LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS the leaflets pound distal occasionally side, Midveins have are short not depressed. petiolules. The Leaflets rachis are is often highly asymmetric with blade the peduncle umbels, round, one to smooth, a few, terminal thin, to or 9" from (23 upper cm) long, branches deeper in than axils wide of reduced and channeled. leaves with inflorescer a clasning it the 0-2 fl +-topped linear, drooping, in shade but become hemispheric in full sun, Great the umbels 3-8" across, may r mostly well needle-tipped bracts with inrolled margins. rays rounded. Umbellets 1.5-5" long, subti early fall) separated, subtended by 1-5 tiny, short, thread-thin bracts (hard 7-21, 8" (13 20 mm the sharp petal on thread-thin tips incurved curved pedicels, not touching, 4 mm across, green in to the see) center Flowers with (late whit ;// almost touch making them look short and blunt. Petals roughly size and 1 each other. Fruit dry upon maturity, 3-4 mm long, oval, flattened, are sharp equal edged. in similar CONFUSING SPECIES: Common water hemlock Cicuta maculata (p. 668) may share its habitat. and and far at a glance, but has regularly serrated leaf margins and multi-compound leaves with smaller more of them. The secondary veins are numerous, straight at first, and deeply depressed. T of water hemlock are entirely dissimilar. Bulblet water hemlock Cicuta bulbifera (p. 670) IS mostly and has multi-compound leaves with exclusively narrow leaflets, and bulblets in upper leaf axils. All springwater parsnip (p. 216) and water parsnip (p. 213), both edible. HABITAT: Seepages, ponds margins, marshes, wet meadows and stream edges, in rich, high-calc Grows in shade to full sun, but larger in sun. Native. WARNING: This is one of the three plants in this book that I consider the most likely for tification. Proceed with great caution! FOOD USE: The tubers can be used as a potato-like vegetable, best gathered from fall through spri are fantastic in any way you'd use a potato. Take a couple and replant the crown. Conservation 3. COMMENTS: Probably my favorite root vegetable: like a potato with a faint hint of carrot, but with a better texture and flavor than either. Widely and erroneously reported as poisonous to livestock; the name results from confusion with water hemlock. This vegetable, almost completely unknown to modern foragers, was eaten by the Cherokee (and probably many Native nations in our region) but its food tradition has been hanging by a thread for a century. Although you will find it listed as deadly poisonous in many sources, this is nonsense. I grow this vegetable, eat it as often as I can, and feed it to my guests, who have universally found it excellent. This is what the colonial destruction of food knowledge looks like. I have not listed the shoots or greens as edible due to the lack of eth- nographic information, but they are not poisonous. There are other species in this genus, the edibility of which are unknown to me. AKA stiff cowbane, pig potato. Leaflets may be entire or toothed. 