PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS
BASAL ONCE COMPOUND LEAVES WITH DISTINCT
4 Sanicle (continued) and easy to find in reported most of eastern poisonous. North America; Worldwide the there group are is
COMMENTS: These plants fruit are abundant They are often erroneously traditionally eaten as as leafy greens in Europe, Americans Asia, in
easy to identify in in bloom this lightly-related or genus. Many widely are used for medicinal purposes region by failure Native of the record,
not multiple our and about region. evidence western 45 occasions; species I interpret North of toxicity. America, they the The taste lack and Latin of similar ethnographically they name to have each is been derived other reported and from to sanus ethnographically food for uses "healthy." in our documented I have as eaten a food all five species species in the on
West. AKA black snakeroot.
5
Cherokee swamp potato
3
Oxypolis rigidior
Apiaceae (Carrot family)
QUICK CHECK: Wetland plant with once-pinnately compound leaves, the leaflets entire
or with a few teeth; tall stall with compound umbels. ID difficulty 3+.
DESCRIPTION: Polycarpic perennial, sometimes spreading by rhizomes. Roots clustered,
radiating, white, thin, flexible, unbranched, terminating in hard, smooth, spherical to elliptic
whitish tubers 0.4-1" (1-2.5 cm) across and up to 2.5" (6 cm) long. There is no dominant
tapróot. Basal leaves in a rosette, absent by blooming, 8-14" (20-36 cm) long, ascending,
pinnately once compound with 5-17 leaflets. Side leaflets are sessile; terminal leaflets may be sessile or stalked.
Petiole/rachis of basal leaves is thin, deeper than wide, rounded below, with a narrow wing-channel above.
Leaflets elliptic or lanceolate, 2.5-5" (6-13 cm) long, sharp-pointed, the blades thin and hairless, paler below.
Midvein flat to slightly depressed above and protruding below. Secondary veins 30-40° to the midvein,
soon splitting and conjoining in a net-like pattern, flat to slightly
depressed above. Margins often purple, entire or with a few teeth
per side, only in the distal 2/3. The teeth may be very large if there are
only 1-2 per side, or small, if there are 4 or more. Teeth often curve
out away from the margin. Stem single, erect but sometimes weak
and leaning in shade, 2-6' (60-180 cm) tall and 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm)
thick, round with minute ridges, hollow, jointed, the inside white
at maturity. The surface
15 smooth, usually hairless
but sometimes with short,
stiff hairs (especially near
the base when young),
intermittently glaucous,
green striped with lighter
green Stem leaves alter-
nate, similar to basal but
shorter with fewer leaf
lets their petioles consist
entirely of ST roiled sheath
upto / long Side
424
PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS BASAL ONCE COMPOUND LEAVES WITH DISTINCT 4 Sanicle (continued) and easy to find in reported most of eastern poisonous. North America; Worldwide the there group are is COMMENTS: These plants fruit are abundant They are often erroneously traditionally eaten as as leafy greens in Europe, Americans Asia, in easy to identify in in bloom this lightly-related or genus. Many widely are used for medicinal purposes region by failure Native of the record, not multiple our and about region. evidence western 45 occasions; species I interpret North of toxicity. America, they the The taste lack and Latin of similar ethnographically they name to have each is been derived other reported and from to sanus ethnographically food for uses "healthy." in our documented I have as eaten a food all five species species in the on West. AKA black snakeroot. 5 Cherokee swamp potato 3 Oxypolis rigidior Apiaceae (Carrot family) QUICK CHECK: Wetland plant with once-pinnately compound leaves, the leaflets entire or with a few teeth; tall stall with compound umbels. ID difficulty 3+. DESCRIPTION: Polycarpic perennial, sometimes spreading by rhizomes. Roots clustered, radiating, white, thin, flexible, unbranched, terminating in hard, smooth, spherical to elliptic whitish tubers 0.4-1" (1-2.5 cm) across and up to 2.5" (6 cm) long. There is no dominant tapróot. Basal leaves in a rosette, absent by blooming, 8-14" (20-36 cm) long, ascending, pinnately once compound with 5-17 leaflets. Side leaflets are sessile; terminal leaflets may be sessile or stalked. Petiole/rachis of basal leaves is thin, deeper than wide, rounded below, with a narrow wing-channel above. Leaflets elliptic or lanceolate, 2.5-5" (6-13 cm) long, sharp-pointed, the blades thin and hairless, paler below. Midvein flat to slightly depressed above and protruding below. Secondary veins 30-40° to the midvein, soon splitting and conjoining in a net-like pattern, flat to slightly depressed above. Margins often purple, entire or with a few teeth per side, only in the distal 2/3. The teeth may be very large if there are only 1-2 per side, or small, if there are 4 or more. Teeth often curve out away from the margin. Stem single, erect but sometimes weak and leaning in shade, 2-6' (60-180 cm) tall and 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm) thick, round with minute ridges, hollow, jointed, the inside white at maturity. The surface 15 smooth, usually hairless but sometimes with short, stiff hairs (especially near the base when young), intermittently glaucous, green striped with lighter green Stem leaves alter- nate, similar to basal but shorter with fewer leaf lets their petioles consist entirely of ST roiled sheath upto / long Side 424 