PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS
ONCE BASAL COMPOUND LEAVES WITH DISTINCT
FH-281
6
Pastinaca Parsnip sativa 3 Apiaceae 3 (Carrot family) toothed
or
lobed,
paired
QUICK CHECK: Long with basal the leaves rachis; with stem 11-13 deeply ruffled, ridged; erratically flowers yellow. ID difficulty pinnately 2.
leaflets out of plane Biennial, taller than wide. Basal leaves which in are rosettes often out of 3-7, of plane with
toothed the (not usually base DESCRIPTION: compound, rachis offset), and purplish, and/or a in faint 8-22" full mostly lobed, sun. hairy bulging (20-56 sessile Rachis usually or ring hairless, cm) but narrowly where ruffled, long occasionally naked with each channeled, the 11-13 in teeth set the with leaflets, of lower large leaflets deeper short 40-70%, and petiolules, is than blunt attached. are with wide, with flat a or roughly gently a short Leaflets nearly nipple sheath ridged, ovate, so tip. 1-3" above The at solid, the
coarsely surface is semi-glossy
(2.5-8 cm) and long, irregularly paired
and protruding below.
above, variably hairy few leaves toward the top, branched in the upper third, 4-6' sharp ridges. Stem
but more 50 below. Veins and veinlets (1.2-2 m) tall, thick-walled
Stem single, erect, with hollow, jointed. the surface finely hairy with numerous prominent, to fully double-
with a small, irregular the lower ones up to 30" (75 cm) long on robust plants and sometimes partly tapered sheath.
leaves alternate, the ones shorter with fewer leaflets and no petiole beyond the broad, wide the
compound; Inflorescence flat-topped upper compound umbels (may be 3 times compound) up to 7" (18 cm) near top
of the plant, the rays ridged, with no bracts at the junctures. Flowers (early to mid summer) yellow, tiny, with
5 petals barely extending past the yellow-green ovary and hooking back to the center, the outer flowers in
the umbellet larger, the center flowers crowded and touching. Fruit flattened, oblong, 5-8 mm, smooth, held
erect, very aromatic, ripening to brown in mid to late summer, drying and splitting in two.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Butterweed Packera glabella blooms in spring and the stalk has a large hollow.
HABITAT: Rich, well-drained soil in full sun. Needs disturbance, although not yearly. Roadsides, pastures,
old fields, forest edges, meadows. Introduced. I
FOOD USE: Dig taproots from fall through early spring and use them exactly like cultivated parsnips (they are
the same plant): mashed, fried, baked, grated into casseroles, in soup, or just boiled and served with butter.
426
PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS ONCE BASAL COMPOUND LEAVES WITH DISTINCT FH-281 6 Pastinaca Parsnip sativa 3 Apiaceae 3 (Carrot family) toothed or lobed, paired QUICK CHECK: Long with basal the leaves rachis; with stem 11-13 deeply ruffled, ridged; erratically flowers yellow. ID difficulty pinnately 2. leaflets out of plane Biennial, taller than wide. Basal leaves which in are rosettes often out of 3-7, of plane with toothed the (not usually base DESCRIPTION: compound, rachis offset), and purplish, and/or a in faint 8-22" full mostly lobed, sun. hairy bulging (20-56 sessile Rachis usually or ring hairless, cm) but narrowly where ruffled, long occasionally naked with each channeled, the 11-13 in teeth set the with leaflets, of lower large leaflets deeper short 40-70%, and petiolules, is than blunt attached. are with wide, with flat a or roughly gently a short Leaflets nearly nipple sheath ridged, ovate, so tip. 1-3" above The at solid, the coarsely surface is semi-glossy (2.5-8 cm) and long, irregularly paired and protruding below. above, variably hairy few leaves toward the top, branched in the upper third, 4-6' sharp ridges. Stem but more 50 below. Veins and veinlets (1.2-2 m) tall, thick-walled Stem single, erect, with hollow, jointed. the surface finely hairy with numerous prominent, to fully double- with a small, irregular the lower ones up to 30" (75 cm) long on robust plants and sometimes partly tapered sheath. leaves alternate, the ones shorter with fewer leaflets and no petiole beyond the broad, wide the compound; Inflorescence flat-topped upper compound umbels (may be 3 times compound) up to 7" (18 cm) near top of the plant, the rays ridged, with no bracts at the junctures. Flowers (early to mid summer) yellow, tiny, with 5 petals barely extending past the yellow-green ovary and hooking back to the center, the outer flowers in the umbellet larger, the center flowers crowded and touching. Fruit flattened, oblong, 5-8 mm, smooth, held erect, very aromatic, ripening to brown in mid to late summer, drying and splitting in two. CONFUSING PLANTS: Butterweed Packera glabella blooms in spring and the stalk has a large hollow. HABITAT: Rich, well-drained soil in full sun. Needs disturbance, although not yearly. Roadsides, pastures, old fields, forest edges, meadows. Introduced. I FOOD USE: Dig taproots from fall through early spring and use them exactly like cultivated parsnips (they are the same plant): mashed, fried, baked, grated into casseroles, in soup, or just boiled and served with butter. 426 