BASAL ONCE LEAVES PRESENT,
COMPOUND WITH LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS
Roots
amower
TO
poor
quality
shoots
in
late
spring
and
can
be
peelen
and
cooked
below)
COMMENTS:
Or
parships can be as large
from a garden. and taste as food
if not better areas
IS found, parsn D vallable
by the tor --and most ar down
ers would be glad to get
Few wild vegetables tar
lected as easily. Although reviled
as invasive, it rarely nvades hative
habitats.
CAUTION:
Parsnip shoot at the stage for peeling.
ground parts
(domestic or wild) can cause severe burns ano biisters it get
(See p.23.) Be especially careful if gathering stalks, which are very/juicy. Most
people who get the rash contract it in early summer when the flowering statks
are tall but still soft, easily bruising to release liquid. If you get the juice on your
skin, wash it off as soon as possible.
Burnet-saxifrage
1
Pimpinella saxifraga
Apiaceae (Carrot family)
QUICK CHECK: Parsnip-like leaves, the leaflets with large teeth; stem leaves few and small
with narrow lobes; stems widely branching, thigh-high, with white umbels. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Polycarpic perennial from a tough, white taproot; older plants have mul-
tiple crowns. Basal leaves (usu-
ally gone by flowering, but present
on nearby non-flowering plants)
Rapidly
once pinnately compound, 7-14'
expanding.
(18-36 cm) long, with 7-11 leaf-
lets crowded in the distal half the terminal 3 some:
times conjoined or 3-lobed: leaflets nearly in plane
Rachis 2.5-3.5 mm thick, naked in the lower half
rounded below, slightly deeper than wide, with many
small grooves, a narrow channe! on top and a very
short sheath at the base, which is often reddish
Leaflets 1.1-2.3" (28-58 mm) long, with plunt tips and
broadly angled bases (120-160°) ovate or broadly the side
sessile, attached above rather than at notn
elliptic rachis Blades have very short hairs on below.
of the Veins depressed above and protruding trregular ID
sides. have large, blunt. deeply cut teeth, leaflets have
Margins with abruptly pointed tips: occasional erect,
size lobes Stems single or few from the base. widely,
shallow cm) tall and o min thick DI anching ridges,
to 30" and (75 tough. round but with numerous The fine surface
rigid inside with a pinhole hollow. jointed less promi
pithy by very short stiff hairs these the next page
IS nent roughened in the inflorescence. (Continued on
427
BASAL ONCE LEAVES PRESENT, COMPOUND WITH LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS Roots amower TO poor quality shoots in late spring and can be peelen and cooked below) COMMENTS: Or parships can be as large from a garden. and taste as food if not better areas IS found, parsn D vallable by the tor --and most ar down ers would be glad to get Few wild vegetables tar lected as easily. Although reviled as invasive, it rarely nvades hative habitats. CAUTION: Parsnip shoot at the stage for peeling. ground parts (domestic or wild) can cause severe burns ano biisters it get (See p.23.) Be especially careful if gathering stalks, which are very/juicy. Most people who get the rash contract it in early summer when the flowering statks are tall but still soft, easily bruising to release liquid. If you get the juice on your skin, wash it off as soon as possible. Burnet-saxifrage 1 Pimpinella saxifraga Apiaceae (Carrot family) QUICK CHECK: Parsnip-like leaves, the leaflets with large teeth; stem leaves few and small with narrow lobes; stems widely branching, thigh-high, with white umbels. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Polycarpic perennial from a tough, white taproot; older plants have mul- tiple crowns. Basal leaves (usu- ally gone by flowering, but present on nearby non-flowering plants) Rapidly once pinnately compound, 7-14' expanding. (18-36 cm) long, with 7-11 leaf- lets crowded in the distal half the terminal 3 some: times conjoined or 3-lobed: leaflets nearly in plane Rachis 2.5-3.5 mm thick, naked in the lower half rounded below, slightly deeper than wide, with many small grooves, a narrow channe! on top and a very short sheath at the base, which is often reddish Leaflets 1.1-2.3" (28-58 mm) long, with plunt tips and broadly angled bases (120-160°) ovate or broadly the side sessile, attached above rather than at notn elliptic rachis Blades have very short hairs on below. of the Veins depressed above and protruding trregular ID sides. have large, blunt. deeply cut teeth, leaflets have Margins with abruptly pointed tips: occasional erect, size lobes Stems single or few from the base. widely, shallow cm) tall and o min thick DI anching ridges, to 30" and (75 tough. round but with numerous The fine surface rigid inside with a pinhole hollow. jointed less promi pithy by very short stiff hairs these the next page IS nent roughened in the inflorescence. (Continued on 427 