mm
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
ONCE COMPOUND WITH DISTINCT LEAFLETS
8
Cuckoo flower
2
Cardamine pratensis 4 Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
UICK CHECK: Small, delicate mustard of wetlands and moist soil, the basa' actions
wead-like and sinuous, the flowers light purple. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Short, delicate perennial from a small knobby rhizome. Basal leaves with
a very long, thread-like, sinuous rachis/petiole, often naked until near the tip, with a small,
shallow channel. Leaflets 1-7, mostly entire and nearly rounded, 0.2-0.7" (5-18 mm) long,
in remote pairs, the terminal leaflet larger. Veins are mostly obscure. Stems sinuous, flimsy.
resting on other plants, hairless or nearly so, roundish, to 18" (46 cm) long and 3 mm thick Stem leaves similar
to basal but upward the petioles become shorter and the leaflets less remote. Leaflets are entire (except that
the terminal may be shallowly lobed), nipple-tipped, narrowed at the base, almost hairless. Inflorescence a
terminal raceme of 6-12, the pedicels 8-14 mm. Flowers 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm) wide when open. with 4 sepais
3-4 mm long and 4 much larger petals, light purple with darker veins. Fruit a thin pod 1-2 mm wide and 07-15
(18-38 mm) long with comparatively large, light brown seeds.
HABITAT: Low, wet, calcium-rich soil in shade or sun. Damp openings in low woods, streamside wetlands.
fens, marsh edges, beaver meadows. Native.
FOOD USE: The tubers are edible raw or cooked but are really too small to mess with. Vegetative parts can
be eaten raw or cooked and have a mild horseradish flavor. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: 1 spent years looking for this pretty little mustard because it was in the Peterson field guide
When 1 finally gave up and went camping with some friends, 1 found it.
mm 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, ONCE COMPOUND WITH DISTINCT LEAFLETS 8 Cuckoo flower 2 Cardamine pratensis 4 Brassicaceae (Mustard family) UICK CHECK: Small, delicate mustard of wetlands and moist soil, the basa' actions wead-like and sinuous, the flowers light purple. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Short, delicate perennial from a small knobby rhizome. Basal leaves with a very long, thread-like, sinuous rachis/petiole, often naked until near the tip, with a small, shallow channel. Leaflets 1-7, mostly entire and nearly rounded, 0.2-0.7" (5-18 mm) long, in remote pairs, the terminal leaflet larger. Veins are mostly obscure. Stems sinuous, flimsy. resting on other plants, hairless or nearly so, roundish, to 18" (46 cm) long and 3 mm thick Stem leaves similar to basal but upward the petioles become shorter and the leaflets less remote. Leaflets are entire (except that the terminal may be shallowly lobed), nipple-tipped, narrowed at the base, almost hairless. Inflorescence a terminal raceme of 6-12, the pedicels 8-14 mm. Flowers 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm) wide when open. with 4 sepais 3-4 mm long and 4 much larger petals, light purple with darker veins. Fruit a thin pod 1-2 mm wide and 07-15 (18-38 mm) long with comparatively large, light brown seeds. HABITAT: Low, wet, calcium-rich soil in shade or sun. Damp openings in low woods, streamside wetlands. fens, marsh edges, beaver meadows. Native. FOOD USE: The tubers are edible raw or cooked but are really too small to mess with. Vegetative parts can be eaten raw or cooked and have a mild horseradish flavor. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: 1 spent years looking for this pretty little mustard because it was in the Peterson field guide When 1 finally gave up and went camping with some friends, 1 found it. 