ONCE BASAL COMPOUND LEAVES WITH DISTINCT
PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS
7 Burnet-saxifrage few. smaller with fewer (continued) leaflets, widely spaced, to reduced no petiole toward beyond the the top, sheath. with a finely The leaflets ridged
sheath fully encircling the stem for 1.2-2" teeth; (3-5 uppermost leaves tiny with 1-3 narrow 4.5" (11 cm) in fruit, Inflo-
Stem leaves are cm), with little pointed lobes,
are long, narrow, deeply lobed, compound with few umbel 2-3.2" (5-8 cm) wide in bloom, to tightly packed with
rescence is a nearly flat-topped spaced from each other, but the 9-28 flowers within umbel, are but occasionally and
14-28 umbellets. are Umbellets smooth and are hairless. There is usually no bract beneath Flowers the primary (mid to late summer) 4-5 mm
across there is with one 5 pointed, unequal linear, white petals, the tips curled back toward the center. Fruit
touching. Rays sheathing bract; umbellets lack bracts. triangular to heart-shaped,
ribbed, 3-4 mm long, slightly flattened, breaking in two.
HABITAT: Dry roadsides, fields, meadows, hayfields, forest edges, especially where limy and sandy. Full
sun. Introduced. I
FOOD USE: The tender tops of stems and their associated leaves, before flowering, have a taste strongly
reminiscent of cilantro but hotter, less soapy, with a fruity aftertaste and an unpleasant texture. They can be
used sparingly as a seasoning herb.
COMMENTS: This plant is neither a burnet nor a saxifrage. It is a close relative of the commercial anise
(Pimpinella anisum), and it has been grown as a fodder crop on poor soils in northern Europe. It occurs sporadi-
cally and is locally abundant in some regions-for example, it is perhaps the most common roadside plant
around Hayward, Wisconsin. Expect its population to explode in the coming decades. The plant is better
known as a medicinal than a food.
4.8
(bottern left) Upper stem leaf (top right) Basal leaf
(bottom right) Tender tip
ONCE BASAL COMPOUND LEAVES WITH DISTINCT PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS 7 Burnet-saxifrage few. smaller with fewer (continued) leaflets, widely spaced, to reduced no petiole toward beyond the the top, sheath. with a finely The leaflets ridged sheath fully encircling the stem for 1.2-2" teeth; (3-5 uppermost leaves tiny with 1-3 narrow 4.5" (11 cm) in fruit, Inflo- Stem leaves are cm), with little pointed lobes, are long, narrow, deeply lobed, compound with few umbel 2-3.2" (5-8 cm) wide in bloom, to tightly packed with rescence is a nearly flat-topped spaced from each other, but the 9-28 flowers within umbel, are but occasionally and 14-28 umbellets. are Umbellets smooth and are hairless. There is usually no bract beneath Flowers the primary (mid to late summer) 4-5 mm across there is with one 5 pointed, unequal linear, white petals, the tips curled back toward the center. Fruit touching. Rays sheathing bract; umbellets lack bracts. triangular to heart-shaped, ribbed, 3-4 mm long, slightly flattened, breaking in two. HABITAT: Dry roadsides, fields, meadows, hayfields, forest edges, especially where limy and sandy. Full sun. Introduced. I FOOD USE: The tender tops of stems and their associated leaves, before flowering, have a taste strongly reminiscent of cilantro but hotter, less soapy, with a fruity aftertaste and an unpleasant texture. They can be used sparingly as a seasoning herb. COMMENTS: This plant is neither a burnet nor a saxifrage. It is a close relative of the commercial anise (Pimpinella anisum), and it has been grown as a fodder crop on poor soils in northern Europe. It occurs sporadi- cally and is locally abundant in some regions-for example, it is perhaps the most common roadside plant around Hayward, Wisconsin. Expect its population to explode in the coming decades. The plant is better known as a medicinal than a food. 4.8 (bottern left) Upper stem leaf (top right) Basal leaf (bottom right) Tender tip 