PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS
ONCE BASAL COMPOUND LEAVES WITH DISTINCT
9 Shotweed 2
(Mustard
family)
Brassicaceae
Cardamine hirsuta mustard with vertical exploding pods and difficulty few stem 1. leaves;
QUICK CHECK: Very small compound with almost-round leaflets. ID
rosette leaves pinnately Small annual or winter annual. Basal leaves numerous, Rachis winged, 16-90 hairy per rosette, on the
DESCRIPTION: compound with 7-11 leaflets. long,
2-4" (5-10 cm) long, near pinnately the base), naked for 30-60% of its length. below, Leaflets the margins 5-13 hairy mm with
occasional margin out of plane, (especially blunt hairless teeth. to Lateral soft-hairy leaflets above, are broadly nearly hairless elliptic teeth, to nearly on petiolules round (proximal 10% of their leaflets length. often The narrower), terminal
abruptly widening at the base, with a few broader large, blunt than long. Veins mostly obscure, only the erect, largest often visible, lean-
leaflet is much larger, to 1" (2.5 cm) faintly wide, depressed above. Stems multiple, spreading to nearly simple
these all coming from back the in, base 6-14" and (15-36 cm) tall and 2-4 mm thick, ridged, hairless in the lower or portion, so, with the or
ing out then curving branches. Stem leaves alternate, few, concentrated lobed, and tapered to
with strongly shorter ascending and the wing wider. The leaflets are fewer and narrower, occasionally the strongly ascending.
petioles dense, erect, terminal raceme to 5" (13 cm) long, pedicels absent) hardly spreading,
the base. Inflorescence winter, early a spring) tiny and white, the 4 broad petals (sometimes nearly cylindri-
cal, often vertical; when ripe they explode upon contact, spraying numerous tiny brown seeds high enough your face.
Flowers overtopped (fall, by pods or from below. Pods 0.6-1" (15-25 mm) long and about 1 mm thick, hairless, to hit
HABITAT: Rich, moist, disturbed soil, sunny or moderately shady. Often abundant in sidewalk cracks, gardens,
yards, and flower planters. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Gather the tender greens in fall, winter, or spring and use like watercress in salads, sandwiches,
mixed potherbs, soups, or casseroles.
COMMENTS: This common, often overlooked weed has a flavor like mild watercress. It grows in cool weather.
Children rarely forget this plant after the pods explode and shoot seeds into their eyes. Despite the Linnaean
name, the few hairs are not one of the features first or readily noticed. Interestingly, the flowers of this spe-
cies have 4 stamens, unlike the 6 normally found in the mustard family-but this is not something that you
are likely to notice without a hand lens and very steady
fingers. AKA hairy bittercress.
RELATED EDIBLES: There are several similar edible
species in this genus, such as C. parviflora and C. flexuosa.
430
PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS ONCE BASAL COMPOUND LEAVES WITH DISTINCT 9 Shotweed 2 (Mustard family) Brassicaceae Cardamine hirsuta mustard with vertical exploding pods and difficulty few stem 1. leaves; QUICK CHECK: Very small compound with almost-round leaflets. ID rosette leaves pinnately Small annual or winter annual. Basal leaves numerous, Rachis winged, 16-90 hairy per rosette, on the DESCRIPTION: compound with 7-11 leaflets. long, 2-4" (5-10 cm) long, near pinnately the base), naked for 30-60% of its length. below, Leaflets the margins 5-13 hairy mm with occasional margin out of plane, (especially blunt hairless teeth. to Lateral soft-hairy leaflets above, are broadly nearly hairless elliptic teeth, to nearly on petiolules round (proximal 10% of their leaflets length. often The narrower), terminal abruptly widening at the base, with a few broader large, blunt than long. Veins mostly obscure, only the erect, largest often visible, lean- leaflet is much larger, to 1" (2.5 cm) faintly wide, depressed above. Stems multiple, spreading to nearly simple these all coming from back the in, base 6-14" and (15-36 cm) tall and 2-4 mm thick, ridged, hairless in the lower or portion, so, with the or ing out then curving branches. Stem leaves alternate, few, concentrated lobed, and tapered to with strongly shorter ascending and the wing wider. The leaflets are fewer and narrower, occasionally the strongly ascending. petioles dense, erect, terminal raceme to 5" (13 cm) long, pedicels absent) hardly spreading, the base. Inflorescence winter, early a spring) tiny and white, the 4 broad petals (sometimes nearly cylindri- cal, often vertical; when ripe they explode upon contact, spraying numerous tiny brown seeds high enough your face. Flowers overtopped (fall, by pods or from below. Pods 0.6-1" (15-25 mm) long and about 1 mm thick, hairless, to hit HABITAT: Rich, moist, disturbed soil, sunny or moderately shady. Often abundant in sidewalk cracks, gardens, yards, and flower planters. Introduced. FOOD USE: Gather the tender greens in fall, winter, or spring and use like watercress in salads, sandwiches, mixed potherbs, soups, or casseroles. COMMENTS: This common, often overlooked weed has a flavor like mild watercress. It grows in cool weather. Children rarely forget this plant after the pods explode and shoot seeds into their eyes. Despite the Linnaean name, the few hairs are not one of the features first or readily noticed. Interestingly, the flowers of this spe- cies have 4 stamens, unlike the 6 normally found in the mustard family-but this is not something that you are likely to notice without a hand lens and very steady fingers. AKA hairy bittercress. RELATED EDIBLES: There are several similar edible species in this genus, such as C. parviflora and C. flexuosa. 430 