BASAL ONCE LEAVES PRESENT,
COMPOUND WITH LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS
10 Pennsylvania cress
2
Cardamine
pensylvanica
Brassicaceae
leaves UICK with CHECK: tiny Small mustard of mucky wetlands with tiny white Howers (Mustard and compound family)
blunt leaflets. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: long, pinnately Annual or winter annual. Basal leaves several to
the lower compound with 7-13 scarcely touching leaflets. Rachis numerous, 2 6" (5-15 (m)
5-12 mm quarter or third, and narrowly winged between leaflets. Leaflets flat above, naked in
to few, erect Blades thin and hairless. Major veins are faintly depressed; petiolules other 10-30% of
blade length. across, entire or with blunt, short lobes or teeth, on narrow lumpy-rounded,
base but to leaning or decumbent, 8-18" (20-46 cm) tall and 2-8 mm thick, veins often obscure. Stems single
branches sparse to hairless above, angled, light green, with a small hollow, much branched fairtly hairy near the
close ascending. Stem leaves progressively shorter with fewer, more widely spaced leaflets, in full sun, the
to the base of the rachis. The leaflets are longer and narrower than on basal leaves-ovate the first ones
to narrowly elliptic, 5-15 mm long, narrowed to the base, sessile or nearly so, the tips rounded even or phoyate
leaflets, usually with a tiny white nipple. Rachis wings become wider upward, such that the uppermost on narrow eaves
may be considered deeply pinnately lobed rather than compound. Margins entire or with a few bluct teeth
or small lobes, mostly on the proximal side. The terminal leaflet or section is largest, wider, and somet mes
deeply lobed. Inflorescence one or a few small, dense terminal racemes. Flowers (spring) 3-4 mm across
with 4 sepals and 4 white petals twice as long, not opening widely. Pods thin, erect, 0.4-1.2' (1-3 (r) long, on
pedicels half that length, containing numerous tiny, round, brown seeds.
HABITAT: Shady areas with bare or disturbed mud, but usually not flood-scoured. Marshes, swamps flood.
plain puddles, drying pond margins, ditches, springs and seepage areas. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender greens are slightly hot, between horseradish and watercress, and can be used raw or choked
The rosette leaves are often abundant in late fall; the tender leafy stems appear in spring. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: I like this plant. It's not just in Pennsylvania. We find lots of it in the Mississippi floodplain from
wapato time until snow cover. The biggest drawback of this common and widespread native mustard is that
it is small, although occasional plants in full sun on rich muck might get as thick as a small person pinkle.
Some people call this "American watercress"- a great way to
add confusion where none needs to exist. The usual pock name
"Pennsylvania bittercress" is equally bad in a different way
because the plant is hot rather than bitter.
431
BASAL ONCE LEAVES PRESENT, COMPOUND WITH LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS 10 Pennsylvania cress 2 Cardamine pensylvanica Brassicaceae leaves UICK with CHECK: tiny Small mustard of mucky wetlands with tiny white Howers (Mustard and compound family) blunt leaflets. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: long, pinnately Annual or winter annual. Basal leaves several to the lower compound with 7-13 scarcely touching leaflets. Rachis numerous, 2 6" (5-15 (m) 5-12 mm quarter or third, and narrowly winged between leaflets. Leaflets flat above, naked in to few, erect Blades thin and hairless. Major veins are faintly depressed; petiolules other 10-30% of blade length. across, entire or with blunt, short lobes or teeth, on narrow lumpy-rounded, base but to leaning or decumbent, 8-18" (20-46 cm) tall and 2-8 mm thick, veins often obscure. Stems single branches sparse to hairless above, angled, light green, with a small hollow, much branched fairtly hairy near the close ascending. Stem leaves progressively shorter with fewer, more widely spaced leaflets, in full sun, the to the base of the rachis. The leaflets are longer and narrower than on basal leaves-ovate the first ones to narrowly elliptic, 5-15 mm long, narrowed to the base, sessile or nearly so, the tips rounded even or phoyate leaflets, usually with a tiny white nipple. Rachis wings become wider upward, such that the uppermost on narrow eaves may be considered deeply pinnately lobed rather than compound. Margins entire or with a few bluct teeth or small lobes, mostly on the proximal side. The terminal leaflet or section is largest, wider, and somet mes deeply lobed. Inflorescence one or a few small, dense terminal racemes. Flowers (spring) 3-4 mm across with 4 sepals and 4 white petals twice as long, not opening widely. Pods thin, erect, 0.4-1.2' (1-3 (r) long, on pedicels half that length, containing numerous tiny, round, brown seeds. HABITAT: Shady areas with bare or disturbed mud, but usually not flood-scoured. Marshes, swamps flood. plain puddles, drying pond margins, ditches, springs and seepage areas. Native. FOOD USE: Tender greens are slightly hot, between horseradish and watercress, and can be used raw or choked The rosette leaves are often abundant in late fall; the tender leafy stems appear in spring. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: I like this plant. It's not just in Pennsylvania. We find lots of it in the Mississippi floodplain from wapato time until snow cover. The biggest drawback of this common and widespread native mustard is that it is small, although occasional plants in full sun on rich muck might get as thick as a small person pinkle. Some people call this "American watercress"- a great way to add confusion where none needs to exist. The usual pock name "Pennsylvania bittercress" is equally bad in a different way because the plant is hot rather than bitter. 431 