PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS
BASAL ONCE COMPOUND LEAVES WITH DISTINCT
11 bittercress
Cardamine Narrow-leaf impatiens + Brassicaceae 2 (Mustard family) small
Shin-high mustard with angled stems, ID difficulty leaves with 1. numerous
QUICK CHECK: the same size; flowers tiny, pods thin.
leaflets about Mostly winter annual, sometimes annual or and biennial. thin, Basal often leaves sinuous, numer- with
DESCRIPTION: by blooming, long Rachis pro-
usually 13-21 purple when cold, green later, wing-channeled, deeply lobed in a
ous. prevalent small in cold leaflets weather of similar but size gone distributed evenly and almost to the base. mostly hairless.
Rapidly
portionately very narrow, about wide, often ruffled, moderately proximal to side of the
expanding
palmate compact-pinnate blade length. The surface has scattered, appressed offset by hairs; light color, the mar- flat
Leaflets 8-12 or mm long and pattern, as lopsided (more blade on the almost
leaflet), on petiolules Lobes are 5-20% blunt of with the a nipple or claw tip. Major veins above sometimes are usually multiple, erect, strongly
gin is hairier. at the bottom of a broad valley. Stems usually single but alternate, 4-6" (10-15 cm) long,
or faintly raised mostly unbranched, to 28" (70 cm) tall, hairless. Stem leaves with long hairs
angled or ridged, the base with a long, narrow, scrolled, curved, entire auricle wrapping around the stem, Leaflets
ascending, Rachis has a shallow wing-channel with occasional long hairs on the margin. with 13-17,
on the margins. than on basal leaves, lanceolate, to 0.7" (18 mm) long, inequilateral, the tips blunt-pointed a nipple,
narrower margins entire or with a few large, erratic teeth or small lobes (more on the proximal side); becoming almost
sessile and less lobed upward. Major veins are in valleys. Inflorescence terminal racemes to 7" (18 cm) long,
crowded. Flowers tiny with 4 long-elliptic white petals or the petals absent. Pods numerous, 1" (2.5 cm) long,
thin, straight, sharp-pointed, strongly ascending, flattened laterally, the edges dark, on pedicels 1/3 their length.
HABITAT: Rich soil in shade; disturbed hardwood forests, especially floodplains. I
FOOD USE: Tender parts can be eaten raw or cooked, mostly in spring or early summer.
COMMENTS: A common invasive weed rapidly spreading in floodplains of the East. The basal leaflets are
shaped very differently from those on the stem.
Stem leaf.
432
PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS BASAL ONCE COMPOUND LEAVES WITH DISTINCT 11 bittercress Cardamine Narrow-leaf impatiens + Brassicaceae 2 (Mustard family) small Shin-high mustard with angled stems, ID difficulty leaves with 1. numerous QUICK CHECK: the same size; flowers tiny, pods thin. leaflets about Mostly winter annual, sometimes annual or and biennial. thin, Basal often leaves sinuous, numer- with DESCRIPTION: by blooming, long Rachis pro- usually 13-21 purple when cold, green later, wing-channeled, deeply lobed in a ous. prevalent small in cold leaflets weather of similar but size gone distributed evenly and almost to the base. mostly hairless. Rapidly portionately very narrow, about wide, often ruffled, moderately proximal to side of the expanding palmate compact-pinnate blade length. The surface has scattered, appressed offset by hairs; light color, the mar- flat Leaflets 8-12 or mm long and pattern, as lopsided (more blade on the almost leaflet), on petiolules Lobes are 5-20% blunt of with the a nipple or claw tip. Major veins above sometimes are usually multiple, erect, strongly gin is hairier. at the bottom of a broad valley. Stems usually single but alternate, 4-6" (10-15 cm) long, or faintly raised mostly unbranched, to 28" (70 cm) tall, hairless. Stem leaves with long hairs angled or ridged, the base with a long, narrow, scrolled, curved, entire auricle wrapping around the stem, Leaflets ascending, Rachis has a shallow wing-channel with occasional long hairs on the margin. with 13-17, on the margins. than on basal leaves, lanceolate, to 0.7" (18 mm) long, inequilateral, the tips blunt-pointed a nipple, narrower margins entire or with a few large, erratic teeth or small lobes (more on the proximal side); becoming almost sessile and less lobed upward. Major veins are in valleys. Inflorescence terminal racemes to 7" (18 cm) long, crowded. Flowers tiny with 4 long-elliptic white petals or the petals absent. Pods numerous, 1" (2.5 cm) long, thin, straight, sharp-pointed, strongly ascending, flattened laterally, the edges dark, on pedicels 1/3 their length. HABITAT: Rich soil in shade; disturbed hardwood forests, especially floodplains. I FOOD USE: Tender parts can be eaten raw or cooked, mostly in spring or early summer. COMMENTS: A common invasive weed rapidly spreading in floodplains of the East. The basal leaflets are shaped very differently from those on the stem. Stem leaf. 432 