BASAL ONCE LEAVES PRESENT,
COMPOUND WITH LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS
12 Twin cress
2
difficulty
Lepidium didymum Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
leaves QUICK with CHECK: tiny leaflets Tiny, ground-hugging and tiny flowers. mustard ID difficulty with decumbent 2. stems and compound
DESCRIPTION: long, pinnately Winter annual with basal rosettes. Basal leaves many,
Rachis naked for compound with numerous tiny, sessile or very short-stalked 2-5" (5-13 cm)
slightly convex 20-50% of its length, proportionately very wide, gently leaflets.
ones the above (not channeled), solid, hairless. Leaflets 3-11 mm long, rounded below,
Major
sometimes entire, as if larger a with a few major lobes, most or all of them on the distal side, the smallest in a
veins
or beyond the palmate leaf were cut in half. The lobes are often constricted at resulting the lopsided look,
flat with the middle, the ends blunt or rounded with a claw tip. The upper surface is base and widest near
major veins faintly raised; other veins are obscure. Stems several, spreading smooth or and hairless,
5-14" hairless (13-36 cm) long, tough at the base, solid, roundish to somewhat flattened, branching much decumbent, and
or minutely hairy. Stem leaves alternate, similar to basal but shorter, deeply lobed but often not widely,
compound/divided, the rachis often shallowly channeled. Inflorescence a crowded raceme to 1.3" (33 mm) fully
long, often borne near but not in an axil, sometimes with flowers also borne singly on the main stem near the
attachment point. Flowers tiny with 4 green sepals, the petals absent or tiny and almost invisible. Pods about
2 mm across, flat, appearing like 2 conjoined discs.
HABITAT: Disturbed soil, usually rich, in full sun to moderate shade. Probably native but possibly introduced
or adventive from South America.
FOOD USE: All the tender parts, especially leaves and stem tips, can be eaten raw or cooked. The flavor is
strong, aromatic, a bit strange, but pleasant. Not particularly hot. The best time is late winter or early spring.
It can be hard to find clean plants. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This tiny mustard is quite abundant but easy to overlook. It has one of the more peculiar flavors
of our mustards. The common and Linnaean names come from the unique form of the seedpods. AKA lesser
swine cress, wart cress.
433
BASAL ONCE LEAVES PRESENT, COMPOUND WITH LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS 12 Twin cress 2 difficulty Lepidium didymum Brassicaceae (Mustard family) leaves QUICK with CHECK: tiny leaflets Tiny, ground-hugging and tiny flowers. mustard ID difficulty with decumbent 2. stems and compound DESCRIPTION: long, pinnately Winter annual with basal rosettes. Basal leaves many, Rachis naked for compound with numerous tiny, sessile or very short-stalked 2-5" (5-13 cm) slightly convex 20-50% of its length, proportionately very wide, gently leaflets. ones the above (not channeled), solid, hairless. Leaflets 3-11 mm long, rounded below, Major sometimes entire, as if larger a with a few major lobes, most or all of them on the distal side, the smallest in a veins or beyond the palmate leaf were cut in half. The lobes are often constricted at resulting the lopsided look, flat with the middle, the ends blunt or rounded with a claw tip. The upper surface is base and widest near major veins faintly raised; other veins are obscure. Stems several, spreading smooth or and hairless, 5-14" hairless (13-36 cm) long, tough at the base, solid, roundish to somewhat flattened, branching much decumbent, and or minutely hairy. Stem leaves alternate, similar to basal but shorter, deeply lobed but often not widely, compound/divided, the rachis often shallowly channeled. Inflorescence a crowded raceme to 1.3" (33 mm) fully long, often borne near but not in an axil, sometimes with flowers also borne singly on the main stem near the attachment point. Flowers tiny with 4 green sepals, the petals absent or tiny and almost invisible. Pods about 2 mm across, flat, appearing like 2 conjoined discs. HABITAT: Disturbed soil, usually rich, in full sun to moderate shade. Probably native but possibly introduced or adventive from South America. FOOD USE: All the tender parts, especially leaves and stem tips, can be eaten raw or cooked. The flavor is strong, aromatic, a bit strange, but pleasant. Not particularly hot. The best time is late winter or early spring. It can be hard to find clean plants. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This tiny mustard is quite abundant but easy to overlook. It has one of the more peculiar flavors of our mustards. The common and Linnaean names come from the unique form of the seedpods. AKA lesser swine cress, wart cress. 433 