(Rose:
BASAL ONCE LEAVES PRESENTH LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS
14 Red clover
1
2
Trifolium
pratense
Fabaceae
(Legume
QUICK a tightly-packed, CHECK: 3-part rounded compound cluster. leaves ID difficulty with sessile 1. leaflets, numerous family) king
DESCRIPTION: shallowly channeled, Perennial herb. Basal leaves in a rosette,
marked with a whitish chevron hairy, hollow petioles 3-6" (8-15 cm) usually long, with mixed with stems. on
with blunt tips (broad V). Leaflets 0.6-1.2" (15-30 3 sessile leaflets
hairs; the upper that surface may have a tiny notch. The lower surface and cm) long, ovate to elliptic
depressed flat has fewer or none. The margins are entire margins have long. soft
raised above. or Stems in a valley; secondary veins numerous, close together, or very minutely toothed. Midvein slightly
green, round with fine to 52" (132 cm) long and 3-6 mm thick, creeping or decumbent very thin, to branched. flat to ightly
leaves alternate, ridges and scattered long hairs. The internodes weakly erect. uniformly
the top. Petioles similar to basal but the leaflets narrower, the petioles becoming are very long, branches few Stem
with green veins, with have a broad, unusual sheath at the base formed by two conjoined stipules, progressively shorter toward
form the 2 tapering needle-like appendages; the sheath is often split, the two nearly transparent but
at petiole. the Inflorescence a tightly-packed round head (actually a condensed raceme) parts converging to
across, takenly end of a grooved peduncle 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, containing 20-200 flowers. (Many 1-2 5-5 cm,
the a broad, butterfly-like, veiny sheath. Flowers tiny and pink-tipped to wholly purple-red, with 5 irregular forming pasts
see this whole cluster as a single flower.) Right under each head is a pair of leaves with stipuies people
banner extending far beyond the wings and keel.
HABITAT: Sunny to partially sunny situations in man-made habitats such as meadows, pastures, hayfields
and roadsides. It can thrive in low-nitrogen and poorly drained soil. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Flowers have a nice flavor to nibble raw as a snack. They can also be used in tea mixtures, and
they can be ground or blended and used in baked goods. Tender young leaves and stem tips can be eaten
raw or cooked. They are mediocre and should be eaten in limited quantity due to their low digestibility Young
leaves of red clover, eaten raw, cause an unpleasant burning sensation in my mouth.
COMMENTS: The most commonly used part is the flower. Literature often mentions the edibility of the
roots of various clovers, but I know of no one who eats these of
our common weedy species,
RELATED EDIBLES: Alsike clover T. hybridum is clump-forming
like red clover but smaller, and the stems are reclining or decum-
bent. The flowers are both pink and red, in smaller clusters that
are not subtended
by leaves. Its leaves
lack chevrons and
have tiny, sharp
teeth on the mar-
gins. Crimson clo-
ver T. incurnatum
is an annual intro-
duced species com-
monin the southern
states, with e'on
gated heads of bold
red flowers It does
not taste nearly as
good as red clover.
Red clover
435
Alsike clover.
(Rose: BASAL ONCE LEAVES PRESENTH LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS 14 Red clover 1 2 Trifolium pratense Fabaceae (Legume QUICK a tightly-packed, CHECK: 3-part rounded compound cluster. leaves ID difficulty with sessile 1. leaflets, numerous family) king DESCRIPTION: shallowly channeled, Perennial herb. Basal leaves in a rosette, marked with a whitish chevron hairy, hollow petioles 3-6" (8-15 cm) usually long, with mixed with stems. on with blunt tips (broad V). Leaflets 0.6-1.2" (15-30 3 sessile leaflets hairs; the upper that surface may have a tiny notch. The lower surface and cm) long, ovate to elliptic depressed flat has fewer or none. The margins are entire margins have long. soft raised above. or Stems in a valley; secondary veins numerous, close together, or very minutely toothed. Midvein slightly green, round with fine to 52" (132 cm) long and 3-6 mm thick, creeping or decumbent very thin, to branched. flat to ightly leaves alternate, ridges and scattered long hairs. The internodes weakly erect. uniformly the top. Petioles similar to basal but the leaflets narrower, the petioles becoming are very long, branches few Stem with green veins, with have a broad, unusual sheath at the base formed by two conjoined stipules, progressively shorter toward form the 2 tapering needle-like appendages; the sheath is often split, the two nearly transparent but at petiole. the Inflorescence a tightly-packed round head (actually a condensed raceme) parts converging to across, takenly end of a grooved peduncle 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, containing 20-200 flowers. (Many 1-2 5-5 cm, the a broad, butterfly-like, veiny sheath. Flowers tiny and pink-tipped to wholly purple-red, with 5 irregular forming pasts see this whole cluster as a single flower.) Right under each head is a pair of leaves with stipuies people banner extending far beyond the wings and keel. HABITAT: Sunny to partially sunny situations in man-made habitats such as meadows, pastures, hayfields and roadsides. It can thrive in low-nitrogen and poorly drained soil. Introduced. FOOD USE: Flowers have a nice flavor to nibble raw as a snack. They can also be used in tea mixtures, and they can be ground or blended and used in baked goods. Tender young leaves and stem tips can be eaten raw or cooked. They are mediocre and should be eaten in limited quantity due to their low digestibility Young leaves of red clover, eaten raw, cause an unpleasant burning sensation in my mouth. COMMENTS: The most commonly used part is the flower. Literature often mentions the edibility of the roots of various clovers, but I know of no one who eats these of our common weedy species, RELATED EDIBLES: Alsike clover T. hybridum is clump-forming like red clover but smaller, and the stems are reclining or decum- bent. The flowers are both pink and red, in smaller clusters that are not subtended by leaves. Its leaves lack chevrons and have tiny, sharp teeth on the mar- gins. Crimson clo- ver T. incurnatum is an annual intro- duced species com- monin the southern states, with e'on gated heads of bold red flowers It does not taste nearly as good as red clover. Red clover 435 Alsike clover. 