BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
ONCE COMPOUND WITH DISTINCT LEAFLETS
13 False strawberry
1
Duchesnea indica
Rosaceae (Rose family)
QUICK CHECK: Low plant with 3-part compound leaves, strawberry-like fruit, and
vellow flowers with petals. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Trailing perennial herb from a rhizome, spreading by stolons (runners) to
form colonies. Basal leaves in a rosette, compound with 3 leaflets, on petiolules 2-3 mm
long. Leaflets ovate to elliptic, 0.7-1" (18-25 mm) long, hairy on both sides, the margins
with large, blunt, often dark purple teeth. Midvein and secondary veins depressed above.
Petioles 2-3" (5-8 cm) long, hairy, channeled. Stipules hairy, bristle-tipped, partly attached to the petiole base.
Stems multiple, radiating from the base, creeping, 2-3 mm thick, roundish with appressed to leaning soft hairs.
Stem leaves alternate, similar to basal but the leaflets are sessile or nearly so and the petioles shorter; stipules
are ovate or triangular. Flowers single, on long, thin peduncles from leaf axils, the corolla 0.5-0.7" (13-18 mm)
wide with 5 yellow petals, their tips broad and slightly notched. The calyx has 5 triangular, hairy, acuminate-
pointed sepals about as long as the petals. Behind these are 5 green, 3-lobed bracts. Sexual parts in the center
are numerous. Fruit strawberry-like, to 0.8" (2 cm) across, an enlarged, red, juicy receptacle constricted at
the base with numerous red seeds embedded in the surface-these rub off in your hand when you collect
them. The inside is whitish and
spongy.
HABITAT: Moist, semi-
shaded to shady disturbed
soil, especially around homes,
porches, parks, yards, etc.
Introduced.
FOOD USE: The berries can
be collected from summer to
fall and eaten raw or cooked.
COMMENTS: Edible, juicy,
but with hardly any flavor.
These have fooled many into
thinking that "wild strawber-
ries" are lame and flavorless.
They are closely related to
strawberries, but far from the
real thing.
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, ONCE COMPOUND WITH DISTINCT LEAFLETS 13 False strawberry 1 Duchesnea indica Rosaceae (Rose family) QUICK CHECK: Low plant with 3-part compound leaves, strawberry-like fruit, and vellow flowers with petals. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Trailing perennial herb from a rhizome, spreading by stolons (runners) to form colonies. Basal leaves in a rosette, compound with 3 leaflets, on petiolules 2-3 mm long. Leaflets ovate to elliptic, 0.7-1" (18-25 mm) long, hairy on both sides, the margins with large, blunt, often dark purple teeth. Midvein and secondary veins depressed above. Petioles 2-3" (5-8 cm) long, hairy, channeled. Stipules hairy, bristle-tipped, partly attached to the petiole base. Stems multiple, radiating from the base, creeping, 2-3 mm thick, roundish with appressed to leaning soft hairs. Stem leaves alternate, similar to basal but the leaflets are sessile or nearly so and the petioles shorter; stipules are ovate or triangular. Flowers single, on long, thin peduncles from leaf axils, the corolla 0.5-0.7" (13-18 mm) wide with 5 yellow petals, their tips broad and slightly notched. The calyx has 5 triangular, hairy, acuminate- pointed sepals about as long as the petals. Behind these are 5 green, 3-lobed bracts. Sexual parts in the center are numerous. Fruit strawberry-like, to 0.8" (2 cm) across, an enlarged, red, juicy receptacle constricted at the base with numerous red seeds embedded in the surface-these rub off in your hand when you collect them. The inside is whitish and spongy. HABITAT: Moist, semi- shaded to shady disturbed soil, especially around homes, porches, parks, yards, etc. Introduced. FOOD USE: The berries can be collected from summer to fall and eaten raw or cooked. COMMENTS: Edible, juicy, but with hardly any flavor. These have fooled many into thinking that "wild strawber- ries" are lame and flavorless. They are closely related to strawberries, but far from the real thing. 