BASAL ONCE LEAVES PRESENT,
COMPOUND WITH LEAVES ALTERNAFLETS
16 Purple phacelia
2
Phacelia bipinnatifida Boraginaceae 2 (Borage family)
©MICK ,lotched CHECK: when Low, hairy herb with pinnately compound leaves,
young; showy purple 5-petaled flowers in a called the raceme laaflers ID labad. difficulty 11/1/21
DESCRIPTION: hairy and deeply Biennial. Basal leaves pinnately compound with 2.
twice the blade V-channeled with a small groove in the bottom of 3-5 the leaflets, V. the rachis
and sometimes length, widened at the base, solid, with erect hairs. Leaflets Petiole about
in outline. divided, highly asymmetrical, with irregular large teeth, ovate deeply lobed
green, with Proximal silvery leaflets usually have short petiolules while distal ones are to lanceolate sessile. Surface
are depressed blotches near sinus bases in spring; the underside is less hairy and all hair / above
decumbent, above. Stems single to several, 8-32" (20-80 cm) tall and 6-15 mm thick silvery Maior veins
with purple when young, branched dichotomously at the base or above, zigzag, solid arec' 'n thick leaning
a small hollow, covered with straight, erect, minutely gland-tipped hairs. Stem leaves similar or to walled
with a shorter petiole and a deeper groove in the rachis. Inflorescence (spring) a terminal raceme, one sided basal
coiled at first but straightening at maturity and lengthening in fruit. The rachis is densely covered with hairs
of 2 lengths, some gland-tipped, the pedicels 7-10 mm long. Calyx has 5 narrow, pointed, green. "airy obe:
Corolla purple with a white star in the center, 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) across, 5-lobed, the lobes broad with
minutely wavy margins, cut only about 2/3 to the base, the outer surface minutely hairy. Each lobe has 75419
ing white nectary at its base, visible even before opening. Filaments purple with erect while hairs of two length
protruding far beyond the corolla, tipped with orange-brown anthers. Fruit an ovoid capsule with 2-4 seeds.
each seed 3-4 mm, finely ridged or pitted, black.
CONFUSING SPECIES: Told from other Phacelias by the combination of purple flowers with entire details
and compound leaves. Told from Virginia and large waterleafs (pp. 390-391) by the silvery blotches being
less distinctly bordered, and the presence of some clearly separated, stalked leaflets.
HABITAT: Rich, moist soil in moderate shade, especially where leaf litter accumulates on or near mossy
boulders. Moist woods, creek borders, rocky slopes, road banks, cliff bases. Native.
FOOD USE: Young leaves and shoots can be eaten raw or cooked. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This
flower is gorgeous.
Not a well-known
edible. purple phac-
elia tastes like a good
waterleaf in my opin-
ion, and is common
and widespread.
RELATED EDIBLES:
There are many Phac-
elid species in our
region, and I know
of none that are
dangerous, but this
one tastes the best
of those I have tried.
Purple phase ena
has leatlets that
are sometimes
rully divided
437
BASAL ONCE LEAVES PRESENT, COMPOUND WITH LEAVES ALTERNAFLETS 16 Purple phacelia 2 Phacelia bipinnatifida Boraginaceae 2 (Borage family) ©MICK ,lotched CHECK: when Low, hairy herb with pinnately compound leaves, young; showy purple 5-petaled flowers in a called the raceme laaflers ID labad. difficulty 11/1/21 DESCRIPTION: hairy and deeply Biennial. Basal leaves pinnately compound with 2. twice the blade V-channeled with a small groove in the bottom of 3-5 the leaflets, V. the rachis and sometimes length, widened at the base, solid, with erect hairs. Leaflets Petiole about in outline. divided, highly asymmetrical, with irregular large teeth, ovate deeply lobed green, with Proximal silvery leaflets usually have short petiolules while distal ones are to lanceolate sessile. Surface are depressed blotches near sinus bases in spring; the underside is less hairy and all hair / above decumbent, above. Stems single to several, 8-32" (20-80 cm) tall and 6-15 mm thick silvery Maior veins with purple when young, branched dichotomously at the base or above, zigzag, solid arec' 'n thick leaning a small hollow, covered with straight, erect, minutely gland-tipped hairs. Stem leaves similar or to walled with a shorter petiole and a deeper groove in the rachis. Inflorescence (spring) a terminal raceme, one sided basal coiled at first but straightening at maturity and lengthening in fruit. The rachis is densely covered with hairs of 2 lengths, some gland-tipped, the pedicels 7-10 mm long. Calyx has 5 narrow, pointed, green. "airy obe: Corolla purple with a white star in the center, 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) across, 5-lobed, the lobes broad with minutely wavy margins, cut only about 2/3 to the base, the outer surface minutely hairy. Each lobe has 75419 ing white nectary at its base, visible even before opening. Filaments purple with erect while hairs of two length protruding far beyond the corolla, tipped with orange-brown anthers. Fruit an ovoid capsule with 2-4 seeds. each seed 3-4 mm, finely ridged or pitted, black. CONFUSING SPECIES: Told from other Phacelias by the combination of purple flowers with entire details and compound leaves. Told from Virginia and large waterleafs (pp. 390-391) by the silvery blotches being less distinctly bordered, and the presence of some clearly separated, stalked leaflets. HABITAT: Rich, moist soil in moderate shade, especially where leaf litter accumulates on or near mossy boulders. Moist woods, creek borders, rocky slopes, road banks, cliff bases. Native. FOOD USE: Young leaves and shoots can be eaten raw or cooked. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This flower is gorgeous. Not a well-known edible. purple phac- elia tastes like a good waterleaf in my opin- ion, and is common and widespread. RELATED EDIBLES: There are many Phac- elid species in our region, and I know of none that are dangerous, but this one tastes the best of those I have tried. Purple phase ena has leatlets that are sometimes rully divided 437 