LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS
ONCE BASAL COMPOUND WITH DISTINCT
15 Phacelia Small-flower dubia phacelia Boraginaceae 1 (Borage family)
with pinnately lobed or compound leaves coiled with clusters no teeth, in
covered QUICK CHECK: with stiff Small appressed plant hairs; light bluish 5-petaled flowers in
spring. ID difficulty Winter 2. annual. Basal leaves few, to 2" (5 cm) long, pinnately compound both sur-
DESCRIPTION: leaflets. Leaflets ovate, entire, sessile, 4-10 mm, sharp-pointed, both sides,
faces covered with for the stiff midvein, hairs which is more prominent below. Petioles 100-120% blade to length, spreading shallowly or lax,
with usually 5 appressed or leaning toward the tip. Veins flat on of
obscure except Stems to 15" (38 cm) long and 2-4 mm thick, somewhat angled, upright leaves smaller, hairier,
channeled, branched hairy. at the base, solid, covered with stiff, mostly appressed hairs. Stem than
on sometimes progressively shorter petioles, the upper ones sessile; blades are deeply lobed rather flowers, compound, coiled with
lobes, the terminal lobe largest. Inflorescence a terminal, one-sided raceme of 10-30 at
first, 3 or 5 straightening with blooming, the rachis covered with minute, stiff, appressed hairs; pedicels 5-8 mm.
Flowers (spring) bowl-shaped, 6-9 mm wide. Calyx of 5 sepals, unequal in size, separate to the base, green,
hairy, narrowly oblanceolate with pointed tips, 2/3 as long as the petals. Corolla 5-lobed, fused in the lower
third, spreading widely, light blue to nearly white, with sparse erect hairs on the back, the lobes rounded, not
fringed as in some other phacelias, each with one prominent blue vein down the center. There are 5 protrud-
ing stamens with white filaments with long white hairs, the anthers faintly purple. Fruit a capsule half as long
as the persistent sepals, containing 4-10 brown seeds.
HABITAT: Full sun to moderate shade on well-drained but rich soil. Roadsides, fields, infrequently mowed
lawns, pastures, woodlands (especially where rocky), cedar glades. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender young greens can be eaten raw or cooked. Due to the rough texture they are better
cooked. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: The greens of this plant are recorded as a traditional Cherokee food, but they are pretty bland,
very small, and have a mediocre texture. AKA Appalachian phacelia.
RELATED EDIBLES: Many phacelias are ethnographically documented as food. Phacelia gilioides is a very
similar species that has at times been classified as a variety of P. dubia, and can be used similarly.
436
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS ONCE BASAL COMPOUND WITH DISTINCT 15 Phacelia Small-flower dubia phacelia Boraginaceae 1 (Borage family) with pinnately lobed or compound leaves coiled with clusters no teeth, in covered QUICK CHECK: with stiff Small appressed plant hairs; light bluish 5-petaled flowers in spring. ID difficulty Winter 2. annual. Basal leaves few, to 2" (5 cm) long, pinnately compound both sur- DESCRIPTION: leaflets. Leaflets ovate, entire, sessile, 4-10 mm, sharp-pointed, both sides, faces covered with for the stiff midvein, hairs which is more prominent below. Petioles 100-120% blade to length, spreading shallowly or lax, with usually 5 appressed or leaning toward the tip. Veins flat on of obscure except Stems to 15" (38 cm) long and 2-4 mm thick, somewhat angled, upright leaves smaller, hairier, channeled, branched hairy. at the base, solid, covered with stiff, mostly appressed hairs. Stem than on sometimes progressively shorter petioles, the upper ones sessile; blades are deeply lobed rather flowers, compound, coiled with lobes, the terminal lobe largest. Inflorescence a terminal, one-sided raceme of 10-30 at first, 3 or 5 straightening with blooming, the rachis covered with minute, stiff, appressed hairs; pedicels 5-8 mm. Flowers (spring) bowl-shaped, 6-9 mm wide. Calyx of 5 sepals, unequal in size, separate to the base, green, hairy, narrowly oblanceolate with pointed tips, 2/3 as long as the petals. Corolla 5-lobed, fused in the lower third, spreading widely, light blue to nearly white, with sparse erect hairs on the back, the lobes rounded, not fringed as in some other phacelias, each with one prominent blue vein down the center. There are 5 protrud- ing stamens with white filaments with long white hairs, the anthers faintly purple. Fruit a capsule half as long as the persistent sepals, containing 4-10 brown seeds. HABITAT: Full sun to moderate shade on well-drained but rich soil. Roadsides, fields, infrequently mowed lawns, pastures, woodlands (especially where rocky), cedar glades. Native. FOOD USE: Tender young greens can be eaten raw or cooked. Due to the rough texture they are better cooked. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: The greens of this plant are recorded as a traditional Cherokee food, but they are pretty bland, very small, and have a mediocre texture. AKA Appalachian phacelia. RELATED EDIBLES: Many phacelias are ethnographically documented as food. Phacelia gilioides is a very similar species that has at times been classified as a variety of P. dubia, and can be used similarly. 436 