10h
BASALI-COMPOUNDWITH
LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS
GROUP 27 BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
MULTI-COMPOUND WITH DISTINCT LEAFLETS
All of the but carrot one of family the plants in this group belong to the carrot family,
units (mericarps) upon have fruits called schizocarps that dry out and Apiaceae. split Members
water hemlock Cicuta maturity. Probably the most toxic plant in into two seed
this reason, some of the maculata-is a carrot family member that will our key region, to this common For
and should be used plants in group 27 are considered highly difficult identify group.
their identification only by well-seasoned foragers who are highly to in
columbine skills. However, there are other plants in this confident
and yellow pimpernel, that cannot be confused with water group, hemlock such as
anyone from applying reasonable attention to details. It would be a shame to shy by
everything in the carrot family because a few members are very poisonous. away
Prairie parsnip and the members of the genus Osmorhiza have leaflets that
deeply cut, and some might reasonably key them into group 28-but they are on are the
fence, and I had to put them somewhere. Note that all of the species which normally have
unlobed leaflets will occasionally have a leaflet that is incompletely separated, resulting in an oddly-lobed ea².
In the key I ignore this aberrant minority and focus on the shape of typical leaflets even though abnormal leaf ets
are to be expected. Two species are placed twice in the key because the hairiness of their parts is variable.
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 27
The key is not your final answer!
Leaflets hairless on both sides.
Leaffet margies entire.
1. Yellow pimpernel
or
: Leaffet margins regularly toothed but usually not lobed.
Leaflets narrowly lanceolate, toothed near the base; stems usually branched with leaf sheaths
clasping the larger branches; umbels twice compound. Water hemlock (poisonous, p. 668).
or
Leaflets ovate with broad, untoothed bases; stems usually unbranched, leaf sheaths not
clasping branches if present; larger umbels thrice compound.
2. American lovage
or
Resilets typically or frequently lobed.
Lobes and teeth rounded with the tip indented; veinlets flat above.
13. Red columbine
Lobes and teeth pointed with a projecting claw; veinlets depressed above.
3. Javan water cetery
Bracts beneath the umbellet far exceeding the rays.
Bracts beneath the umbellet shorter than or roughly equal to the rays.
4. Sea lovage
Leaflet margins not toothed in the proximal third.
5. Seaside angelica
Leaflet margins toothed very close to the base.
Leaflets with hairs on one or both sides. (Check underside and veins carefully.)
Main stem hairless (there may be hairs on stems in the inflorescence).
Petioles commonly more than 0.5" (13 mm) thick.
6. Purple angelica
Blooming in late spring: umbels spherical or hemispherical.
7. Mountain angelica
or
Blooming in late summer; umbels flat-topped.
Petioles less than 0.2" (5 mm) thick.
11. Aniseroot
or
Fringe of long hairs present on sheaths and at nodes.
No fringe of hairs on sheaths or at nodes.
9. Goutweed
Margins double-toathed; 15 or fewer leaflets.
2. American lovage
Margins simple-toothed; large leaves with 22+ leaflets.
Main stem with hairs (may be hairless at the base).
short; major vains on leaflets flat or faintly raised above.
10. Prairie parsnip
Leaflets very lobed, deeply incised; basal leaves held close to the ground.
8. Hairy angelica
or
Leaflets toothed but not labed; basal leaves held well off the ground.
Stem maroon and faintly to moderately hairy: anise-scanted.
long: major veins on leaflets depressed above.
11. Aniseroot
12. Sweet cicely
Stem green and very hairy, lacking anise scent.
439
10h BASALI-COMPOUNDWITH LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS GROUP 27 BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, MULTI-COMPOUND WITH DISTINCT LEAFLETS All of the but carrot one of family the plants in this group belong to the carrot family, units (mericarps) upon have fruits called schizocarps that dry out and Apiaceae. split Members water hemlock Cicuta maturity. Probably the most toxic plant in into two seed this reason, some of the maculata-is a carrot family member that will our key region, to this common For and should be used plants in group 27 are considered highly difficult identify group. their identification only by well-seasoned foragers who are highly to in columbine skills. However, there are other plants in this confident and yellow pimpernel, that cannot be confused with water group, hemlock such as anyone from applying reasonable attention to details. It would be a shame to shy by everything in the carrot family because a few members are very poisonous. away Prairie parsnip and the members of the genus Osmorhiza have leaflets that deeply cut, and some might reasonably key them into group 28-but they are on are the fence, and I had to put them somewhere. Note that all of the species which normally have unlobed leaflets will occasionally have a leaflet that is incompletely separated, resulting in an oddly-lobed ea². In the key I ignore this aberrant minority and focus on the shape of typical leaflets even though abnormal leaf ets are to be expected. Two species are placed twice in the key because the hairiness of their parts is variable. TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 27 The key is not your final answer! Leaflets hairless on both sides. Leaffet margies entire. 1. Yellow pimpernel or : Leaffet margins regularly toothed but usually not lobed. Leaflets narrowly lanceolate, toothed near the base; stems usually branched with leaf sheaths clasping the larger branches; umbels twice compound. Water hemlock (poisonous, p. 668). or Leaflets ovate with broad, untoothed bases; stems usually unbranched, leaf sheaths not clasping branches if present; larger umbels thrice compound. 2. American lovage or Resilets typically or frequently lobed. Lobes and teeth rounded with the tip indented; veinlets flat above. 13. Red columbine Lobes and teeth pointed with a projecting claw; veinlets depressed above. 3. Javan water cetery Bracts beneath the umbellet far exceeding the rays. Bracts beneath the umbellet shorter than or roughly equal to the rays. 4. Sea lovage Leaflet margins not toothed in the proximal third. 5. Seaside angelica Leaflet margins toothed very close to the base. Leaflets with hairs on one or both sides. (Check underside and veins carefully.) Main stem hairless (there may be hairs on stems in the inflorescence). Petioles commonly more than 0.5" (13 mm) thick. 6. Purple angelica Blooming in late spring: umbels spherical or hemispherical. 7. Mountain angelica or Blooming in late summer; umbels flat-topped. Petioles less than 0.2" (5 mm) thick. 11. Aniseroot or Fringe of long hairs present on sheaths and at nodes. No fringe of hairs on sheaths or at nodes. 9. Goutweed Margins double-toathed; 15 or fewer leaflets. 2. American lovage Margins simple-toothed; large leaves with 22+ leaflets. Main stem with hairs (may be hairless at the base). short; major vains on leaflets flat or faintly raised above. 10. Prairie parsnip Leaflets very lobed, deeply incised; basal leaves held close to the ground. 8. Hairy angelica or Leaflets toothed but not labed; basal leaves held well off the ground. Stem maroon and faintly to moderately hairy: anise-scanted. long: major veins on leaflets depressed above. 11. Aniseroot 12. Sweet cicely Stem green and very hairy, lacking anise scent. 439 