PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS
BASAL ONCE COMPOUND LEAVES WITH DISTINCT
11
Chocolate root
rivale Rosaceae (Rose family)
Geum in wet, shaded soil, the terminal difficulty leaflets 20-100 2. times larger
DESCRIPTION: than the Perennial. Rhizome 8-13 mm the thick, exterior curved, scaly, branching dark purple-brown at constricted with
quick CHECK side leaflets Rosettes and extremely variable in shape. ID
joints on larger roots. plants The and flesh often is whitish multi-headed, inside with purple veins. Basal pinnately rosette compound of 3-9 leaves, with
many 22" small (56 cm) long (including the petiole), limp to ascending, three much larger leaflets, the terminal
of
which
is
to several tiny, sessile side leaflets; terminating tapered, with deeply one or and broadly V-channeled, green with two scattered extremely long
hairs. naked Sometimes the terminal other leaflets
largest. Rachis in the 2-4 lower mm half, wide, with scarcely a sheath at the base. Leaflets sessile or leaflet nearly is so; broader they have than long, nearly
different shapes, often on unlobed the same or plant. with very shallow lobes and blunt narrower, teeth, less each hairy with than more prominent
rounded or kidney-shaped, above. Other leaves have 3 large leaflets at the tip, slightly above, with scattered long
and glossier and with sharper teeth. Veins on all leaflets very deeply depressed cm) tall, often leaning
lobes, pointed below. Teeth are light in color. Stems 20-40" (50-100 below the inflorescence,
hairs on both one surfaces, to few per but plant, more 2-4 mm thick, round, solid, slightly curvy, unbranched 4-7" long, much
or broken, rough, with long, curving hairs. Stem leaves alternate, widely spaced, small, lone panicle
the surface with slightly major leaflets and ovate stipule-like lobes at the base. Inflorescence a summer)
reduced, of to flowers, 1-3 widely spread on long, nodding, hairy pedicels. Flowers (early to mid 11-14 mm
wide up with 7 triangular-ovate hairy sepals 5-7 mm long, brownish purple with darker veins, their tips sharp
to acuminate. 5 Between these sepais are 5 tiny, linear, recurved sepal lobes about 1/3 the length of the main
sepals. Petals (almost hidden) whitish to dull yellow with purplish blotches and veins, narrow at the base with
a broad fan-like tip. Stamens and pistils are numerous. Each style is twisted and jointed about 90° and appears
to have a tiny feather attached loosely to its tip. Shortly after flowering, while the sepals remain purple, this
"feather" falls off. Fruit is a sticktight ball, each seed with a single hook-tipped barb.
HABITAT: Wet soil high in organic matter, not too acidic, in partial shade: ash,
cedar, or shrub swamps, depressions in woods, wooded wetland margins. Native.
FOOD USE: The rhizomes can be gathered at any time and boiled fresh or roasted
to make a drink that is supposedly "chocolate-like." Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: With a name like "chocolate root" this must be great. Right? Well,
like chocolate, it's bitter. Few people
will find this drink pleasant unless it
is sweetened. Then it's rather good,
in my opinion. The tradition of making
a drink from avens "root" is ancient,
widespread, and applies to multiple
species. This is the one most com-
monly mentioned in North American
literature, and it is the only one I've
tried. AKA water avens, purple avens.
438
PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS BASAL ONCE COMPOUND LEAVES WITH DISTINCT 11 Chocolate root rivale Rosaceae (Rose family) Geum in wet, shaded soil, the terminal difficulty leaflets 20-100 2. times larger DESCRIPTION: than the Perennial. Rhizome 8-13 mm the thick, exterior curved, scaly, branching dark purple-brown at constricted with quick CHECK side leaflets Rosettes and extremely variable in shape. ID joints on larger roots. plants The and flesh often is whitish multi-headed, inside with purple veins. Basal pinnately rosette compound of 3-9 leaves, with many 22" small (56 cm) long (including the petiole), limp to ascending, three much larger leaflets, the terminal of which is to several tiny, sessile side leaflets; terminating tapered, with deeply one or and broadly V-channeled, green with two scattered extremely long hairs. naked Sometimes the terminal other leaflets largest. Rachis in the 2-4 lower mm half, wide, with scarcely a sheath at the base. Leaflets sessile or leaflet nearly is so; broader they have than long, nearly different shapes, often on unlobed the same or plant. with very shallow lobes and blunt narrower, teeth, less each hairy with than more prominent rounded or kidney-shaped, above. Other leaves have 3 large leaflets at the tip, slightly above, with scattered long and glossier and with sharper teeth. Veins on all leaflets very deeply depressed cm) tall, often leaning lobes, pointed below. Teeth are light in color. Stems 20-40" (50-100 below the inflorescence, hairs on both one surfaces, to few per but plant, more 2-4 mm thick, round, solid, slightly curvy, unbranched 4-7" long, much or broken, rough, with long, curving hairs. Stem leaves alternate, widely spaced, small, lone panicle the surface with slightly major leaflets and ovate stipule-like lobes at the base. Inflorescence a summer) reduced, of to flowers, 1-3 widely spread on long, nodding, hairy pedicels. Flowers (early to mid 11-14 mm wide up with 7 triangular-ovate hairy sepals 5-7 mm long, brownish purple with darker veins, their tips sharp to acuminate. 5 Between these sepais are 5 tiny, linear, recurved sepal lobes about 1/3 the length of the main sepals. Petals (almost hidden) whitish to dull yellow with purplish blotches and veins, narrow at the base with a broad fan-like tip. Stamens and pistils are numerous. Each style is twisted and jointed about 90° and appears to have a tiny feather attached loosely to its tip. Shortly after flowering, while the sepals remain purple, this "feather" falls off. Fruit is a sticktight ball, each seed with a single hook-tipped barb. HABITAT: Wet soil high in organic matter, not too acidic, in partial shade: ash, cedar, or shrub swamps, depressions in woods, wooded wetland margins. Native. FOOD USE: The rhizomes can be gathered at any time and boiled fresh or roasted to make a drink that is supposedly "chocolate-like." Conservation 3. COMMENTS: With a name like "chocolate root" this must be great. Right? Well, like chocolate, it's bitter. Few people will find this drink pleasant unless it is sweetened. Then it's rather good, in my opinion. The tradition of making a drink from avens "root" is ancient, widespread, and applies to multiple species. This is the one most com- monly mentioned in North American literature, and it is the only one I've tried. AKA water avens, purple avens. 438 