BASALI.COMPOUNESENT, DISTINCT
LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS
2
3
3
Yellow pimpernel
Apiaceae
(Carrot
family)
tiny QUICK yellow Taenidia CHECK: flowers Very integerrima in tight thin stems, umbellets elliptic widely entire of spaced the leaflets carrot from with family each veins in other. our not region ID prominent, difficulty with tough, usually yellow 1. and and
DESCRIPTION: flowers and entire Perennial, leaflets. Roots the only thickened readily member from and a semi-fibrous branched, the inside. outside compound, Basal brown, leaves each time
bumpy mostly with withered a thick skin by that flowering peels leaflets. on fertile Rachises plants, typically not channeled 3 times at any level but blunt distally to abruptly may be pointed flat on at top. the
1-4. ternately divided, resulting in 27 mm) long, flat, blunt at the base, color. Side leaflets
Leaflets entire, ovate to elliptic, 0.6-1.3" (15-33 smooth appearance; veinlets offset by separated. light Stems 18-45"
tip, hairless, end very leaflets thin. Veins may have flat above, a short giving stalk. a Leaflets are sometimes thin incompletely and delicate-looking, thick-walled
are sessile; usually clumped, proportionately bloom-coated,
(46-115 cm) tall and 3-7 mm thick, reddish dull green, often with darker lines, smooth, hairless, with broad,
but hollow, Branches jointed, few roundish, to none, wide spreading or if present. Stem leaves widely spaced, leaves alternate, are held vertically,
zigzag. sheaths that encircle the stem; the lower ones on very long petioles. Upper umbel 2.5-4" (6-10 cm)
clasping to the stem, and folded around it. Inflorescence a hemispherical compound in the inflorescence. Great
appressed borne at the top of a long, straight, very thin peduncle. There are no bracts crowded flowers on
across, umbels have 7-16 widely spreading, thin rays. Umbellets are widely spaced with 14-30 inward the
thread-like pedicels. Flowers (late spring to early summer) tiny, yellow, with 5 petals curved so
tips meet. Fruit a schizocarp 3-5 mm long, slightly less wide, plump but somewhat flattened.
HABITAT: Dry, open, often rocky woodlands and savannahs with calcium-rich soil, often with oak and hickory;
especially the edges of such woods along trails, clearings, and roads. Native.
FOOD USE: The roots are mild, sweet, and pleasant, although rather tough and small; they should be left
to conserve the plants. The leaves and shoots have a strong but pleasant flavor much like cultivated lovage
or celery leaf. The flavor and texture are best in spring. Seeds make an excellent soup seasoning, like celery
seed. Conservation 3/2/1.
COMMENTS: This is the only member of the carrot family with a lovage-celery flavor native to the Eastern
Woodlands bioregion. I think it is one of our best native culinary herbs-a fantastic addition to a venison stew.
Although widespread, easy to identify, superb, and locally common, it is
hardly known as a wild edible. The population has greatly diminished due to
fire suppression. The seeds are the secret seasoning in my chicken gumbo.
T. montana is a close relative, rare in the Appalachians, reportedly less tasty.
BASALI.COMPOUNESENT, DISTINCT LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS 2 3 3 Yellow pimpernel Apiaceae (Carrot family) tiny QUICK yellow Taenidia CHECK: flowers Very integerrima in tight thin stems, umbellets elliptic widely entire of spaced the leaflets carrot from with family each veins in other. our not region ID prominent, difficulty with tough, usually yellow 1. and and DESCRIPTION: flowers and entire Perennial, leaflets. Roots the only thickened readily member from and a semi-fibrous branched, the inside. outside compound, Basal brown, leaves each time bumpy mostly with withered a thick skin by that flowering peels leaflets. on fertile Rachises plants, typically not channeled 3 times at any level but blunt distally to abruptly may be pointed flat on at top. the 1-4. ternately divided, resulting in 27 mm) long, flat, blunt at the base, color. Side leaflets Leaflets entire, ovate to elliptic, 0.6-1.3" (15-33 smooth appearance; veinlets offset by separated. light Stems 18-45" tip, hairless, end very leaflets thin. Veins may have flat above, a short giving stalk. a Leaflets are sometimes thin incompletely and delicate-looking, thick-walled are sessile; usually clumped, proportionately bloom-coated, (46-115 cm) tall and 3-7 mm thick, reddish dull green, often with darker lines, smooth, hairless, with broad, but hollow, Branches jointed, few roundish, to none, wide spreading or if present. Stem leaves widely spaced, leaves alternate, are held vertically, zigzag. sheaths that encircle the stem; the lower ones on very long petioles. Upper umbel 2.5-4" (6-10 cm) clasping to the stem, and folded around it. Inflorescence a hemispherical compound in the inflorescence. Great appressed borne at the top of a long, straight, very thin peduncle. There are no bracts crowded flowers on across, umbels have 7-16 widely spreading, thin rays. Umbellets are widely spaced with 14-30 inward the thread-like pedicels. Flowers (late spring to early summer) tiny, yellow, with 5 petals curved so tips meet. Fruit a schizocarp 3-5 mm long, slightly less wide, plump but somewhat flattened. HABITAT: Dry, open, often rocky woodlands and savannahs with calcium-rich soil, often with oak and hickory; especially the edges of such woods along trails, clearings, and roads. Native. FOOD USE: The roots are mild, sweet, and pleasant, although rather tough and small; they should be left to conserve the plants. The leaves and shoots have a strong but pleasant flavor much like cultivated lovage or celery leaf. The flavor and texture are best in spring. Seeds make an excellent soup seasoning, like celery seed. Conservation 3/2/1. COMMENTS: This is the only member of the carrot family with a lovage-celery flavor native to the Eastern Woodlands bioregion. I think it is one of our best native culinary herbs-a fantastic addition to a venison stew. Although widespread, easy to identify, superb, and locally common, it is hardly known as a wild edible. The population has greatly diminished due to fire suppression. The seeds are the secret seasoning in my chicken gumbo. T. montana is a close relative, rare in the Appalachians, reportedly less tasty. 