Apiaceae (Carrot family)
2
American lovage
MULTI-COMPOUNDWITH LEAVES ALTERNAFLETS
Ligusticum canadense 2 Apiaceae 3 (Carrot 3 family)
QUICK per branches; CHECK: Tall herb with hairless, glaucous,
pound. ID difficulty leaves 3. with 3 main divisions, leaflets thin toothed, stoms unitals and
Rachises
DESCRIPTION: Basal leaves Perennial herb from thickened roots,
single leaves, are more rosette common at the base of flowering stalks; leaflet in the form shade) -clumps or
rosettes 3-4 times compound, often single (especially multi-crowned on older plants.
appearance
those in full sun are up usually to 30" (75 shorter cm) tall, and solid as shoots but becoming hollow. plants Petioles In shade on tre balanced on
vertical petioles leaves, and sun or shade. Lone leaves of non-flowering varies between
after the first division leaning. Rachis divides flowering plants
the rachis branches are they solid are with hollow with a rounded bottom and 3 ways slightly at first, ridged the top. branches After the spreading widely:
when Flowering midvein. There may be sparse, fine hairs divisions the final division and continues
onto the top of the leaflet's a small groove on top, which deepens after second division
lower young. stem and plants may have few or no basal leaves; in this near there of the rachis, especially
of blade length, nearly balanced on all sides of it. Leaflets 1.2-4.5" (3-11 case long, sessile is a large or leaf on hugging The
blades flat and lanceolate to ovate or elliptic with a pointed tip, angled at the base and often stalks in
(in shade) hairless above, sometimes faintly hairy on the midvein below. Midvein inequilateral, the
mostly to to flat (in sun). Secondary veins are incised to flat above, about 45°, running above almost may be incred
tipped teeth, but the proximal 20-30% of the blade is toothless. Occasional leaflets are deeply lobed large,
tooth tips. Veinlets are flat to raised above. Margins sharply serrated with moderately straight Naw IFT!
pletely separated. Stems usually single per crown, tall, straight, and lanky, erect and hollow but thick-wailed or inco
jointed, 2-6' (60-180 cm) tall and 8-14 mm thick, hairless below, smooth, round, blotchy-glaucous, most.v
green (purplish near the base) with fine stripes. Branches widely-spaced, thin, naked, spreading or ascending,
in pairs or whorls, often subtended by elongated simple leaves. Stem leaves few and widely spaced, greatly
reduced upward, the petioles vertical, appressed, and broadly sheathing. Inflorescence a series of branch whor's
on the upper stalk; the smaller bear twice-compound umbels but most bear thrice-compound umbels: rebust
stalks terminate in an umbel 4-times compound. Thrice compound umbels have 3-8 rays at the first juncture
each 4-8" (10-20 cm) long, subtended by lanceolate to linear (occasionally lobed) bracts (lacking on smaller
umbels). Rays may have sparse hairs. Secondary rays are 1-1.5" (2.5-4 long and ridged. Twice compound
umbels are roundish and consist of 8-13 widely spaced umbellets, each densely packed with 8-22 flowers
Flowers 2-3 mm across with 5 broad, widely separated white petais with a sharp tip folded in toward the center
attached to a light green, disk-like pistil. Fruit elliptic, slightly flattened, ribbed schizocarps 3-5-7 mm long
CONFUSING PLANTS: Water hemlock (p. 668) does not grow in the same habitat, and the flowering stem
has a very different form. Water hemlock's leaflets are much narrower, toothed to the base. and have veins
terminating in the notch between teeth. Baneberries (p. 676) have smaller, more numerous teeth and en 10
ally obed leaves. (Continued on the next page.)
Isolated shade leat.
441
Basal leaf in sun.
Apiaceae (Carrot family) 2 American lovage MULTI-COMPOUNDWITH LEAVES ALTERNAFLETS Ligusticum canadense 2 Apiaceae 3 (Carrot 3 family) QUICK per branches; CHECK: Tall herb with hairless, glaucous, pound. ID difficulty leaves 3. with 3 main divisions, leaflets thin toothed, stoms unitals and Rachises DESCRIPTION: Basal leaves Perennial herb from thickened roots, single leaves, are more rosette common at the base of flowering stalks; leaflet in the form shade) -clumps or rosettes 3-4 times compound, often single (especially multi-crowned on older plants. appearance those in full sun are up usually to 30" (75 shorter cm) tall, and solid as shoots but becoming hollow. plants Petioles In shade on tre balanced on vertical petioles leaves, and sun or shade. Lone leaves of non-flowering varies between after the first division leaning. Rachis divides flowering plants the rachis branches are they solid are with hollow with a rounded bottom and 3 ways slightly at first, ridged the top. branches After the spreading widely: when Flowering midvein. There may be sparse, fine hairs divisions the final division and continues onto the top of the leaflet's a small groove on top, which deepens after second division lower young. stem and plants may have few or no basal leaves; in this near there of the rachis, especially of blade length, nearly balanced on all sides of it. Leaflets 1.2-4.5" (3-11 case long, sessile is a large or leaf on hugging The blades flat and lanceolate to ovate or elliptic with a pointed tip, angled at the base and often stalks in (in shade) hairless above, sometimes faintly hairy on the midvein below. Midvein inequilateral, the mostly to to flat (in sun). Secondary veins are incised to flat above, about 45°, running above almost may be incred tipped teeth, but the proximal 20-30% of the blade is toothless. Occasional leaflets are deeply lobed large, tooth tips. Veinlets are flat to raised above. Margins sharply serrated with moderately straight Naw IFT! pletely separated. Stems usually single per crown, tall, straight, and lanky, erect and hollow but thick-wailed or inco jointed, 2-6' (60-180 cm) tall and 8-14 mm thick, hairless below, smooth, round, blotchy-glaucous, most.v green (purplish near the base) with fine stripes. Branches widely-spaced, thin, naked, spreading or ascending, in pairs or whorls, often subtended by elongated simple leaves. Stem leaves few and widely spaced, greatly reduced upward, the petioles vertical, appressed, and broadly sheathing. Inflorescence a series of branch whor's on the upper stalk; the smaller bear twice-compound umbels but most bear thrice-compound umbels: rebust stalks terminate in an umbel 4-times compound. Thrice compound umbels have 3-8 rays at the first juncture each 4-8" (10-20 cm) long, subtended by lanceolate to linear (occasionally lobed) bracts (lacking on smaller umbels). Rays may have sparse hairs. Secondary rays are 1-1.5" (2.5-4 long and ridged. Twice compound umbels are roundish and consist of 8-13 widely spaced umbellets, each densely packed with 8-22 flowers Flowers 2-3 mm across with 5 broad, widely separated white petais with a sharp tip folded in toward the center attached to a light green, disk-like pistil. Fruit elliptic, slightly flattened, ribbed schizocarps 3-5-7 mm long CONFUSING PLANTS: Water hemlock (p. 668) does not grow in the same habitat, and the flowering stem has a very different form. Water hemlock's leaflets are much narrower, toothed to the base. and have veins terminating in the notch between teeth. Baneberries (p. 676) have smaller, more numerous teeth and en 10 ally obed leaves. (Continued on the next page.) Isolated shade leat. 441 Basal leaf in sun. 