MULTI-COMPOUNDWITH LEAVES ALTERNATE,
DISTINCT LEAFLETS
3 Javan water celery
2
3
Oenanthe javanica
Apiaceae
(Carrot
family)
QUICK CHECK: Mat-forming plant with once and twice compound
knee-high stems with compound umbels of white flowers. ID difficulty 3+.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a fibrous root system, spreading by rhizomes/stolons and
rooting at nodes to form mats, all parts hairless. Rhizomes 3 mm thick. red to white, semi-
hollow, the thin skin containing usually 4 separate vascular bundles surrounded by air space
Basal leaves in rosettes, 3-8" (8-20 cm) long (including the petiole), pinnately once or twice
compound with 5-23 leaflets, withering by blooming on flowering stalks. Leaflets 0.4-0.8"
Rapidly expending
(1-2 cm) long, blunt and roughly ovate, the smallest leaflets appearing palmately veined, the base broadly
angled and often inequilateral; sessile or with very short petiolules; the terminal leaflet long-stalked or sessile
Surface hairless, glossy below. Margins often purple, with a few large, blunt. nipple-tipped teeth. Major veins
are depressed above and flat to faintly depressed below, running to tooth tips. Petioles green, hollow. thin Nith
several small ridges, the top with a hairline groove, the lower third with a wide, often reddish sheath. Rachis
hollow, more strongly grooved than the petiole. Stems 10-40" (25-102 tall and 5-11 thick, juic / eside
jointed, purple and nearly solid at the base but green above and developing a small, non-round,
low. Cross section is angled, often almost diamond-shaped; increasingly 50 toward the top, with the uppermosi
angles becoming sharp and winged. The surface is hairless with fine vertical lines. branched, erect to learning
or decumbent. Stem leaves alternate, on long internodes, twice pinnately compound, the rachis branches
most with 3-5 leaflets per branch, the blade 8-12" (20-30 cm) long with a total of 20-40 leaflets. Leaflets "
stem leaves are 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long, ovate to lanceolate, pointed, coarsely toothed and occasionally oned
the teeth sharp, the veins more depressed-otherwise similar to basal. Petioles of stem leaves with rar
sheaths, often long and nearly vertical, the walls thin and sharply angled (especially on uppermost leaves, me
hollow also not centered. Rachises of upper leaves are flattened with sharp, clear-winged edges, a ridge below. the
and narrow groove above. Inflorescence flat-topped compound umbels 1.5-2.5" (3.8-6.4 across wide of with
end a of ridged peduncle, the ridges sharp-winged, bearing 8-14 crowded umbellets, each 10-13 mm several long,
flowers. a Rays are 0.7-1.5" (18-64 mm) long, distinctly ridged or angled. There is a whor! usually of
12-22 bracts beneath each umbellet, often surpassing the outer flowers; there with are white no petals or
linear, green umbel, but occasionally 1-2 are present. Flowers 2-3 mm across, 5 and like.
beneath equal the great size, the tips folded in toward the center, and 5 stamens. The calyx wings. is light green cup
roughly Fruit slightly compressed, broadly elliptic, hairless, ribbed, the ribs with corky
CONFUSING PLANTS:
Springwater parsnip (p. 210)
has once-compound leaves
with the veins not Je
pressed. Water new
(deadly noisonous, P. 008)
is much larger with narrow
er leaflets and round stems
with a round hollow: it lacks
rhizomes (among many oth-
et differences).
HABITAT: Rich, mucky soll
near streams, rivers, ponds,
and lakes, usually in shade
Introduced.
FOOD USE: Young shoots
and leaves and can be used
like tender celery, all grow
mg season but especially ID
spring and early summer
" ontinued on the next
page.)
MULTI-COMPOUNDWITH LEAVES ALTERNATE, DISTINCT LEAFLETS 3 Javan water celery 2 3 Oenanthe javanica Apiaceae (Carrot family) QUICK CHECK: Mat-forming plant with once and twice compound knee-high stems with compound umbels of white flowers. ID difficulty 3+. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a fibrous root system, spreading by rhizomes/stolons and rooting at nodes to form mats, all parts hairless. Rhizomes 3 mm thick. red to white, semi- hollow, the thin skin containing usually 4 separate vascular bundles surrounded by air space Basal leaves in rosettes, 3-8" (8-20 cm) long (including the petiole), pinnately once or twice compound with 5-23 leaflets, withering by blooming on flowering stalks. Leaflets 0.4-0.8" Rapidly expending (1-2 cm) long, blunt and roughly ovate, the smallest leaflets appearing palmately veined, the base broadly angled and often inequilateral; sessile or with very short petiolules; the terminal leaflet long-stalked or sessile Surface hairless, glossy below. Margins often purple, with a few large, blunt. nipple-tipped teeth. Major veins are depressed above and flat to faintly depressed below, running to tooth tips. Petioles green, hollow. thin Nith several small ridges, the top with a hairline groove, the lower third with a wide, often reddish sheath. Rachis hollow, more strongly grooved than the petiole. Stems 10-40" (25-102 tall and 5-11 thick, juic / eside jointed, purple and nearly solid at the base but green above and developing a small, non-round, low. Cross section is angled, often almost diamond-shaped; increasingly 50 toward the top, with the uppermosi angles becoming sharp and winged. The surface is hairless with fine vertical lines. branched, erect to learning or decumbent. Stem leaves alternate, on long internodes, twice pinnately compound, the rachis branches most with 3-5 leaflets per branch, the blade 8-12" (20-30 cm) long with a total of 20-40 leaflets. Leaflets " stem leaves are 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long, ovate to lanceolate, pointed, coarsely toothed and occasionally oned the teeth sharp, the veins more depressed-otherwise similar to basal. Petioles of stem leaves with rar sheaths, often long and nearly vertical, the walls thin and sharply angled (especially on uppermost leaves, me hollow also not centered. Rachises of upper leaves are flattened with sharp, clear-winged edges, a ridge below. the and narrow groove above. Inflorescence flat-topped compound umbels 1.5-2.5" (3.8-6.4 across wide of with end a of ridged peduncle, the ridges sharp-winged, bearing 8-14 crowded umbellets, each 10-13 mm several long, flowers. a Rays are 0.7-1.5" (18-64 mm) long, distinctly ridged or angled. There is a whor! usually of 12-22 bracts beneath each umbellet, often surpassing the outer flowers; there with are white no petals or linear, green umbel, but occasionally 1-2 are present. Flowers 2-3 mm across, 5 and like. beneath equal the great size, the tips folded in toward the center, and 5 stamens. The calyx wings. is light green cup roughly Fruit slightly compressed, broadly elliptic, hairless, ribbed, the ribs with corky CONFUSING PLANTS: Springwater parsnip (p. 210) has once-compound leaves with the veins not Je pressed. Water new (deadly noisonous, P. 008) is much larger with narrow er leaflets and round stems with a round hollow: it lacks rhizomes (among many oth- et differences). HABITAT: Rich, mucky soll near streams, rivers, ponds, and lakes, usually in shade Introduced. FOOD USE: Young shoots and leaves and can be used like tender celery, all grow mg season but especially ID spring and early summer " ontinued on the next page.) 