BASAL MULTI-COMPOUND LEAVES WITH DISTINCT
PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS
3 Javan water celery (continued)
and
there
are
some
named
cultivars. COMMENTS: Because This it plant is introduced is widely and cultivated easily overlooked, as a vegetable this It species and is not an in ornamental, is most far more floras common and is than included official in records no field
guides. indicate. Expect it to spread and be added to more invasive
plant lists. Do not transplant it or spread the seeds. Interest-
ingly, some other members of this genus are extremely poi-
sonous-Oenanthe crocata, for example, is perhaps the most
feared wild plant in Europe. Because of the loose resemblance
to our native water hemlocks, proceed with due caution.
Spring basal leaves.
Sea lovage
2
2
2
Ligusticum scoticum Apiaceae (Carrot family)
QUICK CHECK: Coastal herb, knee to thigh high, with basal leaves on long, erect, red-
dish, round petioles; leaves twice divided in three; umbels flat-topped. ID difficulty 3.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial herb. Roots long and slender, smooth, gently tapering, nearly
white; many of them are often adjacent under robust plants. Basal leaves clumped, numer-
ous, 3 times compound, the rachis dividing into 3 branches, each with 3 leaflets. Most side
leaflets are sessile; most terminal leaflets stalked. Leaflets, especially terminal ones,
the be deeply top with cut. The blades are thick, broadly ovate to diamond-shaped, 1.2-3" (3-8 cm) may long, shiny,
coarsely toothed a network but of depressed veinlets. Midveins flat to faintly depressed above. Margins hairless,
long and 3-9 mm thick, not near reddish the base, the teeth with light claw tips. Petioles long and straight, to sharply 14" (36 cm) and
at least at the base, erect in com-
petition or leaning in full sun,
sheathed and channeled in the
lower 2-4" (5-10 cm), Above the
tapered, wavy-edged sheath the
petioles are round, hairless, nearly
smooth (finely ridged), solid or with
Q pinhole hollow, 3-8 mm in diam-
eter, sometimes slightly grooved
near the top. Rachis branches are
shallowly channeled. Stems to 32"
(80 cm) tall and 0.6" (15 mm) thick,
about twice the height of the basal
leaves, hollow, hairless, usually
erect, not glaucous, purplish dl the
base (and sometimes all over). with
444
BASAL MULTI-COMPOUND LEAVES WITH DISTINCT PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS 3 Javan water celery (continued) and there are some named cultivars. COMMENTS: Because This it plant is introduced is widely and cultivated easily overlooked, as a vegetable this It species and is not an in ornamental, is most far more floras common and is than included official in records no field guides. indicate. Expect it to spread and be added to more invasive plant lists. Do not transplant it or spread the seeds. Interest- ingly, some other members of this genus are extremely poi- sonous-Oenanthe crocata, for example, is perhaps the most feared wild plant in Europe. Because of the loose resemblance to our native water hemlocks, proceed with due caution. Spring basal leaves. Sea lovage 2 2 2 Ligusticum scoticum Apiaceae (Carrot family) QUICK CHECK: Coastal herb, knee to thigh high, with basal leaves on long, erect, red- dish, round petioles; leaves twice divided in three; umbels flat-topped. ID difficulty 3. DESCRIPTION: Perennial herb. Roots long and slender, smooth, gently tapering, nearly white; many of them are often adjacent under robust plants. Basal leaves clumped, numer- ous, 3 times compound, the rachis dividing into 3 branches, each with 3 leaflets. Most side leaflets are sessile; most terminal leaflets stalked. Leaflets, especially terminal ones, the be deeply top with cut. The blades are thick, broadly ovate to diamond-shaped, 1.2-3" (3-8 cm) may long, shiny, coarsely toothed a network but of depressed veinlets. Midveins flat to faintly depressed above. Margins hairless, long and 3-9 mm thick, not near reddish the base, the teeth with light claw tips. Petioles long and straight, to sharply 14" (36 cm) and at least at the base, erect in com- petition or leaning in full sun, sheathed and channeled in the lower 2-4" (5-10 cm), Above the tapered, wavy-edged sheath the petioles are round, hairless, nearly smooth (finely ridged), solid or with Q pinhole hollow, 3-8 mm in diam- eter, sometimes slightly grooved near the top. Rachis branches are shallowly channeled. Stems to 32" (80 cm) tall and 0.6" (15 mm) thick, about twice the height of the basal leaves, hollow, hairless, usually erect, not glaucous, purplish dl the base (and sometimes all over). with 444 