(continued)
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
MULTI-COMPOUND WITH DISTINCT LEAFLETS
(ine ridges, often purple striped. Branches are few, strongly ascending to nearly vertic al. Stem leaves
with a short sheath at the base, often clasping a branch, the petiole often purple striped Upper stem alternate leaves
divide immediately beyond the sheath. Inflorescence compound umbels 2 2 6" (5-7 (m) do ross, Hat. topped
or slightly convex in flower (may be slightly concave in fruit), on a long, thick peduncle above the leaves, each
with 14-26 rays 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long. The umbellets are crowded and touching, as are the flowers within them
1
der each umbellet is a whorl of linear bracts, which wither at flowering. Flowers 6-7 mm across withs white
petals of uniform size, hooked inward so strongly the tips often touch the petal near the base. Anthers are
purple at the tips of spreading filaments. Fruit a slightly flattened schizocarp with prominent ridges.
HABITAT: Rocky seashores and occasionally high spots in salt marshes. Native.
FOOD USE: The roots can be used as a parsnip-like vegetable, especially when tops are dormant. Gather
young, tender stems and greens in spring and early summer and use like celery in soups, casseroles, etc.
The leaves can be dried and used as a seasoning much like cultivated parsley or lovage. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: This herb has excellent flavor, but it doesn't taste
like lovage. It's more like a strong, lemony celery. Those who live
near its haunts should check it out, AKA Scotch lovage.
patiets
(continued) BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, MULTI-COMPOUND WITH DISTINCT LEAFLETS (ine ridges, often purple striped. Branches are few, strongly ascending to nearly vertic al. Stem leaves with a short sheath at the base, often clasping a branch, the petiole often purple striped Upper stem alternate leaves divide immediately beyond the sheath. Inflorescence compound umbels 2 2 6" (5-7 (m) do ross, Hat. topped or slightly convex in flower (may be slightly concave in fruit), on a long, thick peduncle above the leaves, each with 14-26 rays 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long. The umbellets are crowded and touching, as are the flowers within them 1 der each umbellet is a whorl of linear bracts, which wither at flowering. Flowers 6-7 mm across withs white petals of uniform size, hooked inward so strongly the tips often touch the petal near the base. Anthers are purple at the tips of spreading filaments. Fruit a slightly flattened schizocarp with prominent ridges. HABITAT: Rocky seashores and occasionally high spots in salt marshes. Native. FOOD USE: The roots can be used as a parsnip-like vegetable, especially when tops are dormant. Gather young, tender stems and greens in spring and early summer and use like celery in soups, casseroles, etc. The leaves can be dried and used as a seasoning much like cultivated parsley or lovage. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: This herb has excellent flavor, but it doesn't taste like lovage. It's more like a strong, lemony celery. Those who live near its haunts should check it out, AKA Scotch lovage. patiets 