LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS
MULTI-COMPOUND BASAL WITH DISTINCT
Seaside angelica
2
1
1
5
Angelica lucida Apiaceae (Carrot family)
herb with ground-hugging basal leaves difficulty 3-4 times 3. compound,
QUICK CHECK: and petioles, Coastal and flat-topped compound umbels. ID
thick stems stout taproot. Sap milky (at least later compound in the season). with
DESCRIPTION: Perennial of from a often hugging the ground, 3-4 times second pinnate
Basal leaves in a rosette division 3-5, ternate with the branches long-stalked, the Leaflets 1.7-2.5"
with the divisions ovate to lanceolate with pointed tips, hairless, folded ruffled. lobed, Midvein, sharply veins, and and irregularly veinlets
25-45 leaflets; the staiked, first and the last pinnate and partly to mostly sessile. or
are depressed to above, the base, giving the a teeth with light or dark claw tips. Petioles to 13" (33 crown, cm) 1-3' (30-90 cm) tall,
(45-65 mm) long, finely reticulated surface. Margins sometimes long and 0.9" (23 mm)
toothed nearly hairless, glaucous, light greenish to white at the base. Stems 3-5 per The surface of the
lower stout, stem hollow, is with smooth, broad ridges, sometimes dotted with sticky glands, hairless lobed sheath glaucous. that
thick, hollow, jointed, to 1.2" (3 cm) thick, usually leaning, with a few ascending branches. and
The stem green has a few hairs. Lower stem leaves have long petioles; the base has a broad,
enlarges upper abruptly. Upper stem leaves are smaller and have no petiole beyond the sheath, which is broad, open,
and enlarged. Inflorescence compound umbels held above the leaves, 3-5" (8-13 cm) across, flat-topped, the
peduncle and rays with many narrow, high ridges and short erect hairs, with 20-30 umbellets nearly touching.
There are numerous purple-tipped linear bracts under
the umbellet in bloom, which wither as the fruit ripens.
THE
Great umbels in fruit often have a single large bract.
Flowers within the umbellets are densely packed. Flow-
ers (June-Sept.) 3-4 mm across with 5 white, hooked
petals, adjacent to slightly overlapped at the base.
Fruits 6-10 mm, oblong, very densely packed, plump,
with prominent ridges and corky wings.
HABITAT: Rocky coasts and upper beaches, especially
near boulders. Native.
FOOD USE: Young leaves and petioles can be used
like celery, but sparingly. Shoots are peeled and eaten.
Seeds can be used as a seasoning.
COMMENTS: This plant tastes about the same as
purple angelica; it's just a shorter, salt-tolerant ver-
sion. AKA seawatch.
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS MULTI-COMPOUND BASAL WITH DISTINCT Seaside angelica 2 1 1 5 Angelica lucida Apiaceae (Carrot family) herb with ground-hugging basal leaves difficulty 3-4 times 3. compound, QUICK CHECK: and petioles, Coastal and flat-topped compound umbels. ID thick stems stout taproot. Sap milky (at least later compound in the season). with DESCRIPTION: Perennial of from a often hugging the ground, 3-4 times second pinnate Basal leaves in a rosette division 3-5, ternate with the branches long-stalked, the Leaflets 1.7-2.5" with the divisions ovate to lanceolate with pointed tips, hairless, folded ruffled. lobed, Midvein, sharply veins, and and irregularly veinlets 25-45 leaflets; the staiked, first and the last pinnate and partly to mostly sessile. or are depressed to above, the base, giving the a teeth with light or dark claw tips. Petioles to 13" (33 crown, cm) 1-3' (30-90 cm) tall, (45-65 mm) long, finely reticulated surface. Margins sometimes long and 0.9" (23 mm) toothed nearly hairless, glaucous, light greenish to white at the base. Stems 3-5 per The surface of the lower stout, stem hollow, is with smooth, broad ridges, sometimes dotted with sticky glands, hairless lobed sheath glaucous. that thick, hollow, jointed, to 1.2" (3 cm) thick, usually leaning, with a few ascending branches. and The stem green has a few hairs. Lower stem leaves have long petioles; the base has a broad, enlarges upper abruptly. Upper stem leaves are smaller and have no petiole beyond the sheath, which is broad, open, and enlarged. Inflorescence compound umbels held above the leaves, 3-5" (8-13 cm) across, flat-topped, the peduncle and rays with many narrow, high ridges and short erect hairs, with 20-30 umbellets nearly touching. There are numerous purple-tipped linear bracts under the umbellet in bloom, which wither as the fruit ripens. THE Great umbels in fruit often have a single large bract. Flowers within the umbellets are densely packed. Flow- ers (June-Sept.) 3-4 mm across with 5 white, hooked petals, adjacent to slightly overlapped at the base. Fruits 6-10 mm, oblong, very densely packed, plump, with prominent ridges and corky wings. HABITAT: Rocky coasts and upper beaches, especially near boulders. Native. FOOD USE: Young leaves and petioles can be used like celery, but sparingly. Shoots are peeled and eaten. Seeds can be used as a seasoning. COMMENTS: This plant tastes about the same as purple angelica; it's just a shorter, salt-tolerant ver- sion. AKA seawatch. 