0
1cm
BASALI-COMPOUNDWITH
6
Purple angelica
LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS
2
1
Angelica atropurpurea Apiaceae (Carrot family)
flowers QUICK CHECK: in early Enormous herb, the stems and petioles large, hairless, purple:
summer, the clusters large and spherical. ID difficulty hollow,
DESCRIPTION: a strong Very large perennial or blennial herb reaching 5-8' 3+.
pinnately soapy scent when broken, The taproot is large and fleshy. Basal (1.5-2,4m tall, with
leaflets, close compound, up to 32" (8o cm) long and about equally wide, leaves 2-3 times
the terminal occasionally lobed or incompletely divided, the bases obtuse to tapered lanceolate to
ovate, together and often overlapping. Leaflets 1.5-3.5" (4-9 cm) composed long, of 20-80
very fine, soft leaflet); hairs. tips are pointed. Surfaces hairless or nearly 50 above, (especially the underside
textured surface. Veins and veinlets are depressed above and protrude below, giving the leaf densely a coated in
inch), the Major secondary veins end in a tooth. Margins irregularly serrated with small teeth finely reticulate
tooth tips with a white claw or nipple. Petioles of basal leaves 60-90% of the blade length (9-14 per
angle to it, hollow, rounded, not channeled, smooth, up to 1.5" (4 cm) thick. Rachis hollow with a ridge and at an
and a tiny groove on top of this ridge, the rachis branches much deeper than wide with a narrow, sharp-edged on top
channel. Most leaflets are sessile but some have short stalks. Stems usually single, 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) thick at the
base, smooth, covered with bloom, some combination of purple and green (but purple predominates), slightly
zigzag between nodes, hollow, jointed, sparingly branched and only in the upper half. Stem leaves alternate,
mostly near the base, the petioles with a broad, ridged sheath around the stem. Uppermost leaves have a
disproportionately large, open, boat-like sheath bearing a tiny leaf (or blade absent). Inflorescence a few
large, almost spherical compound umbels 5-9" (13-23 cm) in diameter, the 18-40 primary rays strongly ridged.
Umbellets do not touch but the 18-40 flowers within them are crowded into balls. There are no bracts beneath
the great umbel or the umbellet. Flowers 3-5 mm across with 5 tiny, pale greenish, triangular petals with the
tips curved back toward the center; stamens wide-spreading. Fruit an oblong schizocarp 5-6 mm long with
prominent sharp ridges.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Water hemlock (p. 668) is less robust with flat umbels and hairless leaves with
secondary veins ending in notches between the teeth.
HABITAT: Streamsides, lakeshores, marshes, shrub swamps, ditches, fens, springs. Needs rich, wet soil with
lots of organic matter and full to partial sun. Native. (Continued on the next page.)
0 1cm BASALI-COMPOUNDWITH 6 Purple angelica LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS 2 1 Angelica atropurpurea Apiaceae (Carrot family) flowers QUICK CHECK: in early Enormous herb, the stems and petioles large, hairless, purple: summer, the clusters large and spherical. ID difficulty hollow, DESCRIPTION: a strong Very large perennial or blennial herb reaching 5-8' 3+. pinnately soapy scent when broken, The taproot is large and fleshy. Basal (1.5-2,4m tall, with leaflets, close compound, up to 32" (8o cm) long and about equally wide, leaves 2-3 times the terminal occasionally lobed or incompletely divided, the bases obtuse to tapered lanceolate to ovate, together and often overlapping. Leaflets 1.5-3.5" (4-9 cm) composed long, of 20-80 very fine, soft leaflet); hairs. tips are pointed. Surfaces hairless or nearly 50 above, (especially the underside textured surface. Veins and veinlets are depressed above and protrude below, giving the leaf densely a coated in inch), the Major secondary veins end in a tooth. Margins irregularly serrated with small teeth finely reticulate tooth tips with a white claw or nipple. Petioles of basal leaves 60-90% of the blade length (9-14 per angle to it, hollow, rounded, not channeled, smooth, up to 1.5" (4 cm) thick. Rachis hollow with a ridge and at an and a tiny groove on top of this ridge, the rachis branches much deeper than wide with a narrow, sharp-edged on top channel. Most leaflets are sessile but some have short stalks. Stems usually single, 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) thick at the base, smooth, covered with bloom, some combination of purple and green (but purple predominates), slightly zigzag between nodes, hollow, jointed, sparingly branched and only in the upper half. Stem leaves alternate, mostly near the base, the petioles with a broad, ridged sheath around the stem. Uppermost leaves have a disproportionately large, open, boat-like sheath bearing a tiny leaf (or blade absent). Inflorescence a few large, almost spherical compound umbels 5-9" (13-23 cm) in diameter, the 18-40 primary rays strongly ridged. Umbellets do not touch but the 18-40 flowers within them are crowded into balls. There are no bracts beneath the great umbel or the umbellet. Flowers 3-5 mm across with 5 tiny, pale greenish, triangular petals with the tips curved back toward the center; stamens wide-spreading. Fruit an oblong schizocarp 5-6 mm long with prominent sharp ridges. CONFUSING PLANTS: Water hemlock (p. 668) is less robust with flat umbels and hairless leaves with secondary veins ending in notches between the teeth. HABITAT: Streamsides, lakeshores, marshes, shrub swamps, ditches, fens, springs. Needs rich, wet soil with lots of organic matter and full to partial sun. Native. (Continued on the next page.) 