1cm
BASAL-COMPOUNDWITH
LEAVES ALTERNAFLETS
7
Mountain angelica
2
Angelica
2
triquinata
Apiaceae
(Carrot
family)
MICK rple, with CHECK: Large herb with thick stems and large hasat
bloom; umbels flat-topped, blooming in late summer leaves, ID difficulty
DESCRIPTION: plant, whether Perennial herb spreading by seed only, with usually 3+
3 ways again, and flowering the or not. Basal leaves thrice compound, usually 1-2 basal leaves per
(15 mm) thick final division 5 ways. Lone basal leaves are on erect splitting 3 ways.
dark and 18" (46 cm) high. The petioles are straight, smooth, round, petioles in 0.6
1.5-4.5" purple, (4-11 with cm) bloom; they are not channeled, but rachises usually have hollow, a tiny groove hairless above
Blades flat, long, mostly sessile except the terminal leaflets, obtuse to abruptly Leaflets Date
minutely hairy on the veins above: hairs are sparser below but larger and stiffer tapered Margins at the ministely DATE
hairy, often lobed, with large
teeth tipped with a whit st Claim Mid-
vein essentially "at above. secondary
veins flat to raised above and protruding
below, straight, rarely spott ng.
to the midvein, running to the Clain
of a larger tooth. Stems to 5 1.5
high and 1" (2.5 cm) thick round
smooth, without ridges or grooves
hollow, jointed, dark purple. Basa
leaves persist through bioom nz
Stem leaves few, large in the 'ower
third but greatly reduced above Inflo-
rescence several flat-toppec com-
pound umbels to 5" (13 cm) across in
the upper branches; reduced intlo-
rescences are also borne in lower
axils. Peduncle has numerous small
ridges, sparsely covered with min-
ute hairs, the hairs becoming dense
near the umbei. Primary rays have 1
small channel with minute hairs along
the rim: there are no bracts beneath
them. Beneath the umbeliet there '5
a whorl of about a dozen tiny linear,
very sharp bracts, usually recurved in
bloom. Flowers (mid August to mid
Sept.) tiny, with 5 curled creamy pet-
als. Fruit a schizucarp 4-6 mm long
with 8-10 wings, a longer pair with
white margins on each side.
CONFUSING PLANTS: WHO
lock (deadly p. 668) has
smaller, narrower leaflets with de-
pressed secondary veins: the entire
plant lacks hairs
HABITAT: Moist. rich disturbed soll
'il moderate shade at highe. elevar
nons. Along mountain streams road
sides eroding banks. wet areas along
cifts and rock slides swamp edges.
seeps. Native.
(Continued on the next page
449
1cm BASAL-COMPOUNDWITH LEAVES ALTERNAFLETS 7 Mountain angelica 2 Angelica 2 triquinata Apiaceae (Carrot family) MICK rple, with CHECK: Large herb with thick stems and large hasat bloom; umbels flat-topped, blooming in late summer leaves, ID difficulty DESCRIPTION: plant, whether Perennial herb spreading by seed only, with usually 3+ 3 ways again, and flowering the or not. Basal leaves thrice compound, usually 1-2 basal leaves per (15 mm) thick final division 5 ways. Lone basal leaves are on erect splitting 3 ways. dark and 18" (46 cm) high. The petioles are straight, smooth, round, petioles in 0.6 1.5-4.5" purple, (4-11 with cm) bloom; they are not channeled, but rachises usually have hollow, a tiny groove hairless above Blades flat, long, mostly sessile except the terminal leaflets, obtuse to abruptly Leaflets Date minutely hairy on the veins above: hairs are sparser below but larger and stiffer tapered Margins at the ministely DATE hairy, often lobed, with large teeth tipped with a whit st Claim Mid- vein essentially "at above. secondary veins flat to raised above and protruding below, straight, rarely spott ng. to the midvein, running to the Clain of a larger tooth. Stems to 5 1.5 high and 1" (2.5 cm) thick round smooth, without ridges or grooves hollow, jointed, dark purple. Basa leaves persist through bioom nz Stem leaves few, large in the 'ower third but greatly reduced above Inflo- rescence several flat-toppec com- pound umbels to 5" (13 cm) across in the upper branches; reduced intlo- rescences are also borne in lower axils. Peduncle has numerous small ridges, sparsely covered with min- ute hairs, the hairs becoming dense near the umbei. Primary rays have 1 small channel with minute hairs along the rim: there are no bracts beneath them. Beneath the umbeliet there '5 a whorl of about a dozen tiny linear, very sharp bracts, usually recurved in bloom. Flowers (mid August to mid Sept.) tiny, with 5 curled creamy pet- als. Fruit a schizucarp 4-6 mm long with 8-10 wings, a longer pair with white margins on each side. CONFUSING PLANTS: WHO lock (deadly p. 668) has smaller, narrower leaflets with de- pressed secondary veins: the entire plant lacks hairs HABITAT: Moist. rich disturbed soll 'il moderate shade at highe. elevar nons. Along mountain streams road sides eroding banks. wet areas along cifts and rock slides swamp edges. seeps. Native. (Continued on the next page 449 