0
1cm
BASAL-COMPOUNDESENTH LEAVES ALTERNATE,
DISTINCT LEAFLETS
spaced, only a pinhole alternate, hollow, progressively reaching 28-40" smaller (70-102 on cm) in height and 12 mm thick Stem leaves form and
umbellets not touching a nearly flat in bloom. compound umbel to 4.5" (11 cm) wide with 18-30 channeled. thick stiff, and brittle
Inflorescence shorter petioles, the sheaths enlarged. motely
primary umbel lacks Rays of the umbellet are very short- flowers and fruit harry. primary rays'
l'owers (early to late bracts; umbellets have 5-6 pointed, linear bracts on the outer side only. oustered both crowded like The
summer) tiny, with petals nearly invisible Fruits multi-ridged. plumo. hairy schizocaros fingers.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Water hemlock (p. 668) grows in very different habitat;
it has depressed veins, pointed leaflets, and hairless stems.
Upper stem and leaf
HABITAT: Dry, open woodlands and forest margins, especially where the soil is
sandy or thin; associated with oaks, pines, black cherry, and sassafras. Native. H
FOOD USE: Young, tender leaves in spring can be used like parsley. Tender
shoots before blooming (often drooping) can be used as a cooked vegetable-
but the flower buds are strongly flavored and I avoid them. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: Despite the Linnaean name I have seen no evidence that this
species is toxic. I have eaten it several times and have received reliable reports
from other people who have eaten it, none with any ill effect. In fact, it is much
milder than purple angelica, and I think the greens are far better. Some sources
report that the root is the toxic part; I do not eat, nor recommend eating, the
roots of any angelica. AKA woodland angelica.
shout
451
0 1cm BASAL-COMPOUNDESENTH LEAVES ALTERNATE, DISTINCT LEAFLETS spaced, only a pinhole alternate, hollow, progressively reaching 28-40" smaller (70-102 on cm) in height and 12 mm thick Stem leaves form and umbellets not touching a nearly flat in bloom. compound umbel to 4.5" (11 cm) wide with 18-30 channeled. thick stiff, and brittle Inflorescence shorter petioles, the sheaths enlarged. motely primary umbel lacks Rays of the umbellet are very short- flowers and fruit harry. primary rays' l'owers (early to late bracts; umbellets have 5-6 pointed, linear bracts on the outer side only. oustered both crowded like The summer) tiny, with petals nearly invisible Fruits multi-ridged. plumo. hairy schizocaros fingers. CONFUSING PLANTS: Water hemlock (p. 668) grows in very different habitat; it has depressed veins, pointed leaflets, and hairless stems. Upper stem and leaf HABITAT: Dry, open woodlands and forest margins, especially where the soil is sandy or thin; associated with oaks, pines, black cherry, and sassafras. Native. H FOOD USE: Young, tender leaves in spring can be used like parsley. Tender shoots before blooming (often drooping) can be used as a cooked vegetable- but the flower buds are strongly flavored and I avoid them. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: Despite the Linnaean name I have seen no evidence that this species is toxic. I have eaten it several times and have received reliable reports from other people who have eaten it, none with any ill effect. In fact, it is much milder than purple angelica, and I think the greens are far better. Some sources report that the root is the toxic part; I do not eat, nor recommend eating, the roots of any angelica. AKA woodland angelica. shout 451 