BASAL MULTI-COMPOUND LEAVES PRESENT, WITH LEAVES DISTINCT LEAFLETS
Mountain angelica (continued)
i
leaves can be used as a vegetable be raw used or
FOOD cooked. USE: as can Tender peeled young petioles and stems. The seeds can
a seasoning. Conservation 2/1.
WARNING: as Juic is probably phototoxic to the skin (see p. 23).
This species is much milder tasting than purple it is the or
COMMENTS: angelica. For use as a celery-like soup vegetable angelica,
best seacoast of the angelicas in our region. AKA Appalachian
filmy angelica.
(top) Mature fruits.
(bottom) Early spring leaf.
Hairy angelica
2
2
Angelica venenosa Apiaceae (Carrot family)
QUICK CHECK: Plant of dry forests bearing leaves with numerous small leaflets and flat-
topped umbels in late summer; stiff stems, densely hairy in the upper parts. ID difficulty 3-
DESCRIPTION: Polycarpic perennial spreading only by seed. Basal leaves often single on
non-flowering plants, the petiole rising nearly erect for 8-16" (20-40 cm) before splitting
3 ways. Other non-flowering plants have 3-5 small basal leaves. Flowering plants lose the
basal leaves late in maturity. Blades of larger leaves are up to 15" (38 cm) long and 3-4 times
compound with 55-81 leaflets. Petioles straight, scarcely tapered, maroon, to 5 mm in diameter, finely striated
with purple lines and faint ridges, hairless or nearly
50, with a small channel distally. They are pithy-not
hollow. Leaflets 0.5-1.6" (13-41 mm) long, narrowly
ovate, occasionally lobed or incompletely separated,
the tips acute with a short, light claw, There are often
wings between leaflets on the smaller rachises. Distally
the rachises become faintly hairy. Blades hairless to
faintly and minutely hairy above, fine-hairy below,
especially on veins. Midvein in a slight depression but
protruding above; veins and veinlets raised on the
the surface, nearly flat below. Margins regularly toothed. upper
claw-tip. teeth small, broad, forward-pointed with
the Stems smooth, roundish, and hairless a light
toward lower parts, becoming more ridged and on
ridges the top, with short hairs becoming striated
of the upper stem. The stem is pithy prevalent inside with on
Young spring leaves.
BASAL MULTI-COMPOUND LEAVES PRESENT, WITH LEAVES DISTINCT LEAFLETS Mountain angelica (continued) i leaves can be used as a vegetable be raw used or FOOD cooked. USE: as can Tender peeled young petioles and stems. The seeds can a seasoning. Conservation 2/1. WARNING: as Juic is probably phototoxic to the skin (see p. 23). This species is much milder tasting than purple it is the or COMMENTS: angelica. For use as a celery-like soup vegetable angelica, best seacoast of the angelicas in our region. AKA Appalachian filmy angelica. (top) Mature fruits. (bottom) Early spring leaf. Hairy angelica 2 2 Angelica venenosa Apiaceae (Carrot family) QUICK CHECK: Plant of dry forests bearing leaves with numerous small leaflets and flat- topped umbels in late summer; stiff stems, densely hairy in the upper parts. ID difficulty 3- DESCRIPTION: Polycarpic perennial spreading only by seed. Basal leaves often single on non-flowering plants, the petiole rising nearly erect for 8-16" (20-40 cm) before splitting 3 ways. Other non-flowering plants have 3-5 small basal leaves. Flowering plants lose the basal leaves late in maturity. Blades of larger leaves are up to 15" (38 cm) long and 3-4 times compound with 55-81 leaflets. Petioles straight, scarcely tapered, maroon, to 5 mm in diameter, finely striated with purple lines and faint ridges, hairless or nearly 50, with a small channel distally. They are pithy-not hollow. Leaflets 0.5-1.6" (13-41 mm) long, narrowly ovate, occasionally lobed or incompletely separated, the tips acute with a short, light claw, There are often wings between leaflets on the smaller rachises. Distally the rachises become faintly hairy. Blades hairless to faintly and minutely hairy above, fine-hairy below, especially on veins. Midvein in a slight depression but protruding above; veins and veinlets raised on the the surface, nearly flat below. Margins regularly toothed. upper claw-tip. teeth small, broad, forward-pointed with the Stems smooth, roundish, and hairless a light toward lower parts, becoming more ridged and on ridges the top, with short hairs becoming striated of the upper stem. The stem is pithy prevalent inside with on Young spring leaves. 