BASAL MULTI-COMPOUND LEAVES PRESENT, WITH LEAVES DISTINCT LEAFLETS
Aegopodium Goutweed podagraria 2 3 Apiaceae 2 (Carrot hairless family) above,
ovate,
with QUICK deeply CHECK: depressed Basal leaves veins; form knee-high thick ground white flowers cover, blades in compound umbels in early
summer. ID difficulty 2. spreading by rhizome. Basal leaves of spring stalked are twice sessile com-
DESCRIPTION: Perennial divided into 3 branches, each of which bears leaflets, 2-5 each or stalked.
leaflets. pound: first Summer ternately leaves nearly are usually erect, once straight, compound solid, hairless, with only triangular 3 in cross-section, usually pointed the but top sometimes shallowly
Petioles to 16" channeled. (40 cm), Leaflets ovate to lanceolate, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) hairless long, above, corrugated by depressed
blunt, often inequilateral has at minute the base, hairs along the veins. Cultivated clones of this plant strongly are depressed seen
but broadly occasionally lobed. Surface commonly
veinlets. The underside and white leaves; feral plants have a plain green leaf. Midvein most running straight
with variegated green below, as are secondary veins, which are 45° to the midvein, rounded with sharp claw
and Petiolules unbroken proportionately to a narrower and deeper than the rachis with thin, upturned, thick at the margins.
above and protruding tooth tip. Margins serrated, often double-toothed, the teeth wing-like a
tip. Stems 1.5-3' (45-90 tall, erect to leaning, hollow, jointed, hairless, light green, 4-6 mm and base,
round in the lower part but with straw-colored ridges in the upper; zigzag, the internodes straight 8-15"
(20-38 cm) long: branches few to none. Shoots turn faintly purple inside when broken. Stem leaves few, reduced
to once compound with 3 narrow leaflets near the top, the petioles with a broad, lobed sheath to 1.5" (4 cm)
long, Uppermost leaves are sessile. Inflorescence terminal compound umbels 2.5-5" (6-10 cm) across, with
15-20 curved rays, the umbellets not touching but flowers within them tightly packed. Flowers (early summer),
4-5 mm across with 5 white petals incurved at the tip. Fruit a schizocarp shaped like two cylinders connected
on the long side, with a 2-humped yellowish tip.
HABITAT: Well-drained rich soil in full to partial shade. Forest edges, trails, roadsides, and especially old
homesteads. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Collect young leaves at any time, but mostly in spring. Use as a vegetable raw or cooked; they are
mild with a hint of celery or parsley. They can be simmered like nettles or honewort (or with them) to make
a nice vegetable soup base. The shoots and petioles are pleasant raw or cooked.
COMMENTS: The all-green feral form of this herb is harder to recognize than the variegated forms under
cultivation, but it is locally abundant. Of course, the cultivated plants are edible, too. I don't know if it really
cures gout, but there's no harm in trying. AKA ground-elder, bishop's weed.
Variegated leaf of a domestic cultivar.
BASAL MULTI-COMPOUND LEAVES PRESENT, WITH LEAVES DISTINCT LEAFLETS Aegopodium Goutweed podagraria 2 3 Apiaceae 2 (Carrot hairless family) above, ovate, with QUICK deeply CHECK: depressed Basal leaves veins; form knee-high thick ground white flowers cover, blades in compound umbels in early summer. ID difficulty 2. spreading by rhizome. Basal leaves of spring stalked are twice sessile com- DESCRIPTION: Perennial divided into 3 branches, each of which bears leaflets, 2-5 each or stalked. leaflets. pound: first Summer ternately leaves nearly are usually erect, once straight, compound solid, hairless, with only triangular 3 in cross-section, usually pointed the but top sometimes shallowly Petioles to 16" channeled. (40 cm), Leaflets ovate to lanceolate, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) hairless long, above, corrugated by depressed blunt, often inequilateral has at minute the base, hairs along the veins. Cultivated clones of this plant strongly are depressed seen but broadly occasionally lobed. Surface commonly veinlets. The underside and white leaves; feral plants have a plain green leaf. Midvein most running straight with variegated green below, as are secondary veins, which are 45° to the midvein, rounded with sharp claw and Petiolules unbroken proportionately to a narrower and deeper than the rachis with thin, upturned, thick at the margins. above and protruding tooth tip. Margins serrated, often double-toothed, the teeth wing-like a tip. Stems 1.5-3' (45-90 tall, erect to leaning, hollow, jointed, hairless, light green, 4-6 mm and base, round in the lower part but with straw-colored ridges in the upper; zigzag, the internodes straight 8-15" (20-38 cm) long: branches few to none. Shoots turn faintly purple inside when broken. Stem leaves few, reduced to once compound with 3 narrow leaflets near the top, the petioles with a broad, lobed sheath to 1.5" (4 cm) long, Uppermost leaves are sessile. Inflorescence terminal compound umbels 2.5-5" (6-10 cm) across, with 15-20 curved rays, the umbellets not touching but flowers within them tightly packed. Flowers (early summer), 4-5 mm across with 5 white petals incurved at the tip. Fruit a schizocarp shaped like two cylinders connected on the long side, with a 2-humped yellowish tip. HABITAT: Well-drained rich soil in full to partial shade. Forest edges, trails, roadsides, and especially old homesteads. Introduced. FOOD USE: Collect young leaves at any time, but mostly in spring. Use as a vegetable raw or cooked; they are mild with a hint of celery or parsley. They can be simmered like nettles or honewort (or with them) to make a nice vegetable soup base. The shoots and petioles are pleasant raw or cooked. COMMENTS: The all-green feral form of this herb is harder to recognize than the variegated forms under cultivation, but it is locally abundant. Of course, the cultivated plants are edible, too. I don't know if it really cures gout, but there's no harm in trying. AKA ground-elder, bishop's weed. Variegated leaf of a domestic cultivar. 