(Carrot
LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS
10 Prairie parsnip
1
2
Polytaenia
nuttallii/texanum
Apiaceae
(Carrot
family)
QUICK zigzag stem CHECK: with Dark green compound leaves tri-forked at first, leaflets
large umbels of tiny yellow flowers in late spring. ID difficulty labed. 2.
DESCRIPTION: nip-like, to Perennial 2-6' (60-180 cm) tall, the form taller than wide.
1.5" (4 cm) thick, brown and bumpy on the outside, rarely branched. Taproot pars
semi-fibrous all and gray-white, weakly aromatic. Stems, petioles, rachises, and inflorescence the flesh
are covered with dense but short, erect, very fine, semi-soft hairs (especially when
ole Basal has leaves twice compound, in a rosette of 5-9, persisting to early flowering, 6-12" young). (15-30
a short sheath at the base, beyond which it is hollow, not channeled, deeper than wide, cm) long. Peti-
4-8" (10-20 cm) long before forking ternately and widely. Rachis branches divide again, the distal faintly with lined.
small channel on top. Leaflets sessile and flat, dark green, widening toward the tips with spreading parts ohes cut a
to varying depth. Lobe tips have large teeth with whitish nipples; margins are otherwise nearly toothless. Side
leaflets are broadly attached and abruptly widening; terminal leaflets are tapered to a narrow base. Major
veins raised above, bearing short, fine hairs-otherwise the surfaces are hairless or nearly so. Veinlets are
flat. Stems erect, zigzag, to 0.8" (2 cm) thick with a small hollow or almost solid, jointed, roundish but gently
ridged, the surface light green. Branches ascending, mostly in the upper half. Stem leaves alternate, widely
spaced, reduced in size and becoming sessile upward. Inflorescence compound umbels 2-5" (5-13 cm) wide,
convex, on finely ridged peduncles. Umbellets 12-20 mm across, densely packed with 12-35 flowers. The great
umbel has no bracts; umbellets have a whorl of tiny, thread-like linear bracts. Flowers (late spring to early
summer) 2 mm across with 5 greenish-yellow petals strongly curled inward, the stamens protruding through
the gaps. Fruit a schizocarp 5-11 mm long, somewhat flattened, ribbed, the larger side ribs with corky wings.
CONFUSING PLANTS: From a distance it resembles parsnip but the leaf details are very different.
HABITAT: Well-drained or rocky parts of tallgrass prairies or moist pockets in shortgrass prairies. especially
where sandy, high in calcium, and disturbed. Mostly on slopes, including roadsides. Native.
FOOD USE: The roots are large and parsnip-like but rather fibrous and strong-flavored, although sliced thin
they work in a stew. Peeled shoots are tender and have good flavor. The leaves are tough and lame. Seeds can
be used as a seasoning. Conservation 3/2/1.
COMMENTS: This is most commonly separated into two species based on subtle differences. but to the
untrained eye they are identical, and the food uses are similar. The species or subspecies texanum predominates
in Texas and southern Oklahoma, where it is abundant on roadsides. In much of its range the plant is rare due
to habitat loss. AKA prairie parsley, but I think the comparison to parsnip is much more apt.
This root broke off at a rock.
(Carrot LEAVES ALT LEAFLETS 10 Prairie parsnip 1 2 Polytaenia nuttallii/texanum Apiaceae (Carrot family) QUICK zigzag stem CHECK: with Dark green compound leaves tri-forked at first, leaflets large umbels of tiny yellow flowers in late spring. ID difficulty labed. 2. DESCRIPTION: nip-like, to Perennial 2-6' (60-180 cm) tall, the form taller than wide. 1.5" (4 cm) thick, brown and bumpy on the outside, rarely branched. Taproot pars semi-fibrous all and gray-white, weakly aromatic. Stems, petioles, rachises, and inflorescence the flesh are covered with dense but short, erect, very fine, semi-soft hairs (especially when ole Basal has leaves twice compound, in a rosette of 5-9, persisting to early flowering, 6-12" young). (15-30 a short sheath at the base, beyond which it is hollow, not channeled, deeper than wide, cm) long. Peti- 4-8" (10-20 cm) long before forking ternately and widely. Rachis branches divide again, the distal faintly with lined. small channel on top. Leaflets sessile and flat, dark green, widening toward the tips with spreading parts ohes cut a to varying depth. Lobe tips have large teeth with whitish nipples; margins are otherwise nearly toothless. Side leaflets are broadly attached and abruptly widening; terminal leaflets are tapered to a narrow base. Major veins raised above, bearing short, fine hairs-otherwise the surfaces are hairless or nearly so. Veinlets are flat. Stems erect, zigzag, to 0.8" (2 cm) thick with a small hollow or almost solid, jointed, roundish but gently ridged, the surface light green. Branches ascending, mostly in the upper half. Stem leaves alternate, widely spaced, reduced in size and becoming sessile upward. Inflorescence compound umbels 2-5" (5-13 cm) wide, convex, on finely ridged peduncles. Umbellets 12-20 mm across, densely packed with 12-35 flowers. The great umbel has no bracts; umbellets have a whorl of tiny, thread-like linear bracts. Flowers (late spring to early summer) 2 mm across with 5 greenish-yellow petals strongly curled inward, the stamens protruding through the gaps. Fruit a schizocarp 5-11 mm long, somewhat flattened, ribbed, the larger side ribs with corky wings. CONFUSING PLANTS: From a distance it resembles parsnip but the leaf details are very different. HABITAT: Well-drained or rocky parts of tallgrass prairies or moist pockets in shortgrass prairies. especially where sandy, high in calcium, and disturbed. Mostly on slopes, including roadsides. Native. FOOD USE: The roots are large and parsnip-like but rather fibrous and strong-flavored, although sliced thin they work in a stew. Peeled shoots are tender and have good flavor. The leaves are tough and lame. Seeds can be used as a seasoning. Conservation 3/2/1. COMMENTS: This is most commonly separated into two species based on subtle differences. but to the untrained eye they are identical, and the food uses are similar. The species or subspecies texanum predominates in Texas and southern Oklahoma, where it is abundant on roadsides. In much of its range the plant is rare due to habitat loss. AKA prairie parsley, but I think the comparison to parsnip is much more apt. This root broke off at a rock. 