BASALI-COMPOUND WITH LEAVES DISTINCT LEAFLETS
W
IWE-363
11
Aniseroot Osmorhiza longistylis 2 3 Apiaceae 2 (Carrot family).
QUICK CHECK: Knee to thigh-high half, hairy herb at the with nodes; straight, compound erect stem umbels branching with unequal widely
in
the
upper
DESCRIPTION: and rays suddenly ID difficulty Perennial. 2. Taproot small, thin, forking, at the base; whitish, these aromatic. die back Basal in spring. leaves reduced Non- that
overwinter flowering summer are small hairier plants with leaves a have broad surround a dominant, whitish this sheath erect, dominant nearly leaf, divided hairless their 3 sheaths ways, basal leaf the clasping junctures with a its petiole. with a tuft Large of hair. basal Ultimate leaves
sheath; leaflets are up to smaller, are 14" mostly (36 cm) sessile. long, Leaflets 2 or 3 times crowded, whitish, compound, ovate downturned first to lanceolate, claw. Blades pinnately are lobed very thin or deeply and delicate, veins toothed, hairy numerous, the on leaflet both
tips and teeth abruptly below, pointed especially with a on the veins. Midvein depressed above. Secondary below. Basal and are lower stem
sides but much more tooth tips, depressed above and protruding prominent stem
45° to the midvein, unbroken often to lobe purplish or near the base, roundish with a slight channel (more cm) tall and 8-11 on mm
leaves have long petioles, and small hollow in the center. Stems erect, 12-36" (30-90 especially the
leaves), with scattered solid when hairs young, a later developing a small hollow, jointed, usually reddish, and spreading widely. near The
thick, rounded, and unbranched for the first half of its height, then branching abruptly at the nodes and
base; straight hairless (but occasionally quite hairy), very smooth, glaucous, always hairy with short sheaths.
surface is usually sheath. Stem leaves alternate, reduced, the upper ones sessile or nearly so,
on the petiole compound umbels, the first juncture with 5-7 unequal rays and a single long-lanceolate, pointed,
hairy-margined Inflorescence bract. Umbellets not touching (but the 7-14 flowers within are crowded), subtended by a whorl of
similar bracts. Flowers tiny with
5 white petals, the tips curled
in. Fruits dark, almost banana-
shaped schizocarps, each half
with a barbed awn making it cling
to clothing; persisting through
fall, winter, and into the following
spring attached to LYDS.
HABITAT: Rich, moist, but well
drained soil in forests; more com-
mon under hardwoods. Native.
454
BASALI-COMPOUND WITH LEAVES DISTINCT LEAFLETS W IWE-363 11 Aniseroot Osmorhiza longistylis 2 3 Apiaceae 2 (Carrot family). QUICK CHECK: Knee to thigh-high half, hairy herb at the with nodes; straight, compound erect stem umbels branching with unequal widely in the upper DESCRIPTION: and rays suddenly ID difficulty Perennial. 2. Taproot small, thin, forking, at the base; whitish, these aromatic. die back Basal in spring. leaves reduced Non- that overwinter flowering summer are small hairier plants with leaves a have broad surround a dominant, whitish this sheath erect, dominant nearly leaf, divided hairless their 3 sheaths ways, basal leaf the clasping junctures with a its petiole. with a tuft Large of hair. basal Ultimate leaves sheath; leaflets are up to smaller, are 14" mostly (36 cm) sessile. long, Leaflets 2 or 3 times crowded, whitish, compound, ovate downturned first to lanceolate, claw. Blades pinnately are lobed very thin or deeply and delicate, veins toothed, hairy numerous, the on leaflet both tips and teeth abruptly below, pointed especially with a on the veins. Midvein depressed above. Secondary below. Basal and are lower stem sides but much more tooth tips, depressed above and protruding prominent stem 45° to the midvein, unbroken often to lobe purplish or near the base, roundish with a slight channel (more cm) tall and 8-11 on mm leaves have long petioles, and small hollow in the center. Stems erect, 12-36" (30-90 especially the leaves), with scattered solid when hairs young, a later developing a small hollow, jointed, usually reddish, and spreading widely. near The thick, rounded, and unbranched for the first half of its height, then branching abruptly at the nodes and base; straight hairless (but occasionally quite hairy), very smooth, glaucous, always hairy with short sheaths. surface is usually sheath. Stem leaves alternate, reduced, the upper ones sessile or nearly so, on the petiole compound umbels, the first juncture with 5-7 unequal rays and a single long-lanceolate, pointed, hairy-margined Inflorescence bract. Umbellets not touching (but the 7-14 flowers within are crowded), subtended by a whorl of similar bracts. Flowers tiny with 5 white petals, the tips curled in. Fruits dark, almost banana- shaped schizocarps, each half with a barbed awn making it cling to clothing; persisting through fall, winter, and into the following spring attached to LYDS. HABITAT: Rich, moist, but well drained soil in forests; more com- mon under hardwoods. Native. 454 