LEAFLEAFLETS
(Carrot fam
MULTI-COMPOUNDWITH LEAVES
DISTINCT ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS
FOOD tender. USE: The best Roots part are is small the shoot but highly flavored and make a pleasant aibble All aerial
soups. can eaten throughout the growing season. Conservation as a sweet. 3/2,
Leaves be in mid spring; it can be eaten raw refresh parts ng are edible Or added when
COMMENTS: They often I hate black licorice, but 1 love aniseroot stalks; they are one of my favor
especially grow luxuriantly along with wood nettle, mitsuba, cleavers. and waterleafsir to rich spring vegetables CA
common species scattered across the northern Great Lakes region and northern Appalachians. a
thriving under black walnut. AKA sweetroot. Osmorhiza chilensis (berteroi) is smaller wooded and valleys. less
Related Edibles:
12 Sweet Cicely
Osmorhiza claytonii
IWE-363
Very similar to aniseroot and many people lump the two together, but sweet cicely is
almost uniformly light green and much hairier. The lower stems may be hairy or nearly
hairless; upper stems and petioles are uniformly and densely covered with long, straight,
erect, whitish hairs. The leaflets are narrower and more crowded, with the margins deeply
pinnately incised into many small lobes with little to no space between them. The teeth are
rounded, but the leaf divisions are more pointed and long-tapered. Sweet cicely inhabits
most of the same hardwood forests as aniseroot, but also does well in some sandier soils
where the latter is absent. Its stems are sweet but lack the anise flavor.
455
LEAFLEAFLETS (Carrot fam MULTI-COMPOUNDWITH LEAVES DISTINCT ALTERNATE, LEAFLETS FOOD tender. USE: The best Roots part are is small the shoot but highly flavored and make a pleasant aibble All aerial soups. can eaten throughout the growing season. Conservation as a sweet. 3/2, Leaves be in mid spring; it can be eaten raw refresh parts ng are edible Or added when COMMENTS: They often I hate black licorice, but 1 love aniseroot stalks; they are one of my favor especially grow luxuriantly along with wood nettle, mitsuba, cleavers. and waterleafsir to rich spring vegetables CA common species scattered across the northern Great Lakes region and northern Appalachians. a thriving under black walnut. AKA sweetroot. Osmorhiza chilensis (berteroi) is smaller wooded and valleys. less Related Edibles: 12 Sweet Cicely Osmorhiza claytonii IWE-363 Very similar to aniseroot and many people lump the two together, but sweet cicely is almost uniformly light green and much hairier. The lower stems may be hairy or nearly hairless; upper stems and petioles are uniformly and densely covered with long, straight, erect, whitish hairs. The leaflets are narrower and more crowded, with the margins deeply pinnately incised into many small lobes with little to no space between them. The teeth are rounded, but the leaf divisions are more pointed and long-tapered. Sweet cicely inhabits most of the same hardwood forests as aniseroot, but also does well in some sandier soils where the latter is absent. Its stems are sweet but lack the anise flavor. 455 