MULTI-COMPOUND WITH DISTINCT LEAFLÉTS
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
13 Red columbine
3
Aquilegia canadensis
Ranunculaceae (Buttercup family)
QUICK CHECK: Thin stems; compound leaves divided in threes, the leaflet lobes rounded;
flowers with 5 long spurs that have enlarged nectar cavities at the end. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Basal leaves 3-10, twice compound, divided 3 ways each time,
the rachises purple, hairless or with scattered very fine hairs, not channeled. Leaflets may
be stalked or sessile, the blades very thin and delicate, 1-2.5" (2.5-6 cm) long, close together,
smooth, hairless, rounded to broadly angled at the base with 3 main lobes, each often
divided again into more lobes or large teeth. Lobes and teeth are rounded, sometimes slightly
indented, with a nipple tip. Margins entire near the leaflet base. Major veins palmate; veinlets are net-like and
not depressed. Petioles delicate, 6-12" (15-30 cm) long and 2-3 mm thick, purple, not channeled. Stem purple-
brown, thin but stiff and hard, naked for
about 1/3 of its height, finely angled,
faintly hairy toward the top. Stem
leaves have a small, stiff sheath at the
base. The first stem leaves are twice
compound; upper ones are once com-
pound or divided, the leaflets usually
sessile. Inflorescence a loose cluster
of widely-spaced flowers on long, very
thin, nodding pedicels. Flowers (late
spring to early summer) distinct: about
1.5" (4 cm) long, they have 5 yellow
petals largely hidden by five reddish
sepals, and 5 long, backward-point-
ing spurs that terminate in an enlarged,
rounded nectar cavity. A dense cluster
of numerous yellow stamens protrudes
well beyond the petals. Fruit is a cap-
sule or pod of 5 compartments, these
fused at the base but splitting at the
end and curving outward, each with
a long bristle-like tip and containing
numerous small seeds.
HABITAT: Woods and forest edges
or clearings, especially where steep,
rocky, or disturbed. Native.
FOOD USE: The flowers are a deli-
clous snack or garnish enjoyed by
many. Some people bite off just the
hungrier people like me eat the
5 nectaries at the end of the spurs, but
reported as toxic. Conservation 1.
flower. Other parts of the plant entire are
perennial, flowers find
outcroppings, cially and rarely COMMENTS: from inhabits common abundant, does but miles not leave most which around away. harm This is some forests. very it Harvesting this cliffs seems plant, widespread long-lived It and is able espe- while rock the to
edible mingbirds part. The flowers are for the the hum- only
456
MULTI-COMPOUND WITH DISTINCT LEAFLÉTS BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, 13 Red columbine 3 Aquilegia canadensis Ranunculaceae (Buttercup family) QUICK CHECK: Thin stems; compound leaves divided in threes, the leaflet lobes rounded; flowers with 5 long spurs that have enlarged nectar cavities at the end. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Basal leaves 3-10, twice compound, divided 3 ways each time, the rachises purple, hairless or with scattered very fine hairs, not channeled. Leaflets may be stalked or sessile, the blades very thin and delicate, 1-2.5" (2.5-6 cm) long, close together, smooth, hairless, rounded to broadly angled at the base with 3 main lobes, each often divided again into more lobes or large teeth. Lobes and teeth are rounded, sometimes slightly indented, with a nipple tip. Margins entire near the leaflet base. Major veins palmate; veinlets are net-like and not depressed. Petioles delicate, 6-12" (15-30 cm) long and 2-3 mm thick, purple, not channeled. Stem purple- brown, thin but stiff and hard, naked for about 1/3 of its height, finely angled, faintly hairy toward the top. Stem leaves have a small, stiff sheath at the base. The first stem leaves are twice compound; upper ones are once com- pound or divided, the leaflets usually sessile. Inflorescence a loose cluster of widely-spaced flowers on long, very thin, nodding pedicels. Flowers (late spring to early summer) distinct: about 1.5" (4 cm) long, they have 5 yellow petals largely hidden by five reddish sepals, and 5 long, backward-point- ing spurs that terminate in an enlarged, rounded nectar cavity. A dense cluster of numerous yellow stamens protrudes well beyond the petals. Fruit is a cap- sule or pod of 5 compartments, these fused at the base but splitting at the end and curving outward, each with a long bristle-like tip and containing numerous small seeds. HABITAT: Woods and forest edges or clearings, especially where steep, rocky, or disturbed. Native. FOOD USE: The flowers are a deli- clous snack or garnish enjoyed by many. Some people bite off just the hungrier people like me eat the 5 nectaries at the end of the spurs, but reported as toxic. Conservation 1. flower. Other parts of the plant entire are perennial, flowers find outcroppings, cially and rarely COMMENTS: from inhabits common abundant, does but miles not leave most which around away. harm This is some forests. very it Harvesting this cliffs seems plant, widespread long-lived It and is able espe- while rock the to edible mingbirds part. The flowers are for the the hum- only 456 