tm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR LACY
GROUP 28 BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR LACY
Most of the plants in this group belong to the carrot family (Apiaceae) This family also
includes some very poisonous species that will key to group 28-paison
and bulblet water hemlock. Pay special attention to your identification.
Group 28 includes some culturally important root vegetables as well as flavorings,
teas, leafy greens, and shoots. These plants are mostly spring ephemerals or they are
adapted to open, sunny habitats. Since the difference between groups 27 and 28 is
a judgment call, and plant form varies between individuals, you might want to check
group 27 if your plant is not found here.
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 28
The key is not your final answer!
and rachises hairless.
leaves divide immediately at the base.
1. Pineapple weed
leaves have a naked petiole section before the first division.
Petioles of typical lower leaves (the tiniest may differ) hollow with no channel on top.
Petiole hollow proportionately small; stem solid; leaf divisions thread-like.
2. Fennel
Petiole and stem thin-walled with a large hollow, purple spots, and thick bloom;
leaf divisions regularly pinnately toothed or lobed. Poison hemlock (poisonous, p. 671).
or
Aquatic; petiole and stem thin-walled, hollow; bloom faint; leaf divisions not regularly
toothed or lobed; upper leaf axils with bulblets. Bulblet water hemlock (poisonous, p. 670).
3. Hemlock parsley
Petioles of typical lower leaves hollow with a channel on top.
or
4. Caraway
Petioles of lower leaves solid, ribbon-like becoming broadly V-channeled.
or
Petioles of lower leaves solid or with a tiny hollow, channeled on top.
5. Eastern yampa
Basal leaves usually 3; stalks 3-5' (1-1.5 m), blooming in summer.
6. Harbinger of spring
Basal leaves 1 or 2, stalks <8" (20 cm), blooming in spring.
and rachises with only minute woolly to scurfy hairs.
7. Broad-leaf musineon
Leaves glossy.
Leaves dull to grayish, not glossy.
8. White prairie biscuitroot
Stems leaning or spreading, 1-5" (2.5-13 cm) long.
Stems erect, 1-4' (30-120 cm) tall.
14. Western tansy mustard
Pods shorter and much thicker than the pedicels, the tip slightly thickened.
15. European tansy mustard
Pods longer than and only slightly thicker than the pedicels; thickness hairs. uniform.
and rachises with relatively straight, typical, visible, erect to appressed
en lower stem distinctly pressed downward.
9. Cow parsley
Mid-stem thick-walled hollow, with 12-20 flat-topped ridges.
10. Erect hedge parsley
or
Mid-stem solid with fine ridges.
Stem hairs very more smooth, or less nearly erect (right hairless angle or with to the soft surface). hairs. Aniseroot and sweet cicely (group 27).
Stem finely ridged and/or with stiff hairs.
16. Alfilaria
Flowers very pink-purple; fruit needle-like, pointing vertically.
Flowers white: fruit variably shaped schizocarps.
11. Wild carrot
m) tall; stalked compound umbels with 30-90 rays (spring). (summer).
3-6' Less (1-2 (1 m) tall; tiny umbels of less than 10 flowers of 3-5.
12. Southern chervil
than 3' (45-75 cm) tall: umbels compound or in clumps single.
13. Spreading chervil
18-30" 4-16" (10-40 cm) tall; umbels mostly simple and
457
tm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR LACY GROUP 28 BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR LACY Most of the plants in this group belong to the carrot family (Apiaceae) This family also includes some very poisonous species that will key to group 28-paison and bulblet water hemlock. Pay special attention to your identification. Group 28 includes some culturally important root vegetables as well as flavorings, teas, leafy greens, and shoots. These plants are mostly spring ephemerals or they are adapted to open, sunny habitats. Since the difference between groups 27 and 28 is a judgment call, and plant form varies between individuals, you might want to check group 27 if your plant is not found here. TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 28 The key is not your final answer! and rachises hairless. leaves divide immediately at the base. 1. Pineapple weed leaves have a naked petiole section before the first division. Petioles of typical lower leaves (the tiniest may differ) hollow with no channel on top. Petiole hollow proportionately small; stem solid; leaf divisions thread-like. 2. Fennel Petiole and stem thin-walled with a large hollow, purple spots, and thick bloom; leaf divisions regularly pinnately toothed or lobed. Poison hemlock (poisonous, p. 671). or Aquatic; petiole and stem thin-walled, hollow; bloom faint; leaf divisions not regularly toothed or lobed; upper leaf axils with bulblets. Bulblet water hemlock (poisonous, p. 670). 3. Hemlock parsley Petioles of typical lower leaves hollow with a channel on top. or 4. Caraway Petioles of lower leaves solid, ribbon-like becoming broadly V-channeled. or Petioles of lower leaves solid or with a tiny hollow, channeled on top. 5. Eastern yampa Basal leaves usually 3; stalks 3-5' (1-1.5 m), blooming in summer. 6. Harbinger of spring Basal leaves 1 or 2, stalks <8" (20 cm), blooming in spring. and rachises with only minute woolly to scurfy hairs. 7. Broad-leaf musineon Leaves glossy. Leaves dull to grayish, not glossy. 8. White prairie biscuitroot Stems leaning or spreading, 1-5" (2.5-13 cm) long. Stems erect, 1-4' (30-120 cm) tall. 14. Western tansy mustard Pods shorter and much thicker than the pedicels, the tip slightly thickened. 15. European tansy mustard Pods longer than and only slightly thicker than the pedicels; thickness hairs. uniform. and rachises with relatively straight, typical, visible, erect to appressed en lower stem distinctly pressed downward. 9. Cow parsley Mid-stem thick-walled hollow, with 12-20 flat-topped ridges. 10. Erect hedge parsley or Mid-stem solid with fine ridges. Stem hairs very more smooth, or less nearly erect (right hairless angle or with to the soft surface). hairs. Aniseroot and sweet cicely (group 27). Stem finely ridged and/or with stiff hairs. 16. Alfilaria Flowers very pink-purple; fruit needle-like, pointing vertically. Flowers white: fruit variably shaped schizocarps. 11. Wild carrot m) tall; stalked compound umbels with 30-90 rays (spring). (summer). 3-6' Less (1-2 (1 m) tall; tiny umbels of less than 10 flowers of 3-5. 12. Southern chervil than 3' (45-75 cm) tall: umbels compound or in clumps single. 13. Spreading chervil 18-30" 4-16" (10-40 cm) tall; umbels mostly simple and 457 