LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LACY
BASAL MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR
1
Matricaria Pineapple matricarioides weed 1 Asteraceae (Aster family)
QUICK CHECK: Very short; lacy divided leaves; aromatic, yellow, cone-like heads with
no rays. ID difficulty Low 1. annual or winter annual. Rosette present broad on early at the spring base, plants, deeply
withering by maturity. into numerous, thin, lacy segments, the ultimate lobes subdivision linear, always
DESCRIPTION: Basal leaves 1.5-4" (4-10 cm) long, hairless, pointed, and
often curved. each structure. The first divisions are pinnate, divisions lean), are to 12" palmate (30 cm) or
divided 1-3 times There are no distinct petioles or petiolules within the leaf; but smaller
nearly so. thick, solid, hairless to faintly hairy, roundish but somewhat leaves angled alternate, similar running
begins at the Stems base erect of if single (when multiple or branched at the base, the outer stems with ridges
tall, proportionately from each node, often with profuse ascending compound branches. Stem Rachis flat and to
basal, down dividing immediately with lobes crowded at the broad and nearly clasping base. broad, not
channeled, slightly keeled below, the same color as leaf divisions. Inflorescence (late spring to early summer)
composite heads 5-8 mm across, solitary and terminal on long peduncles from upper branches, light greenish
yellow, rounded at first becoming bluntly conical, composed of disk florets only.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Chamomile M. chamomilla is a larger species that has ray and disk florets.
HABITAT: Disturbed, moist ground, especially in poor soil. Common in driveways, parking areas, road
shoulders, sidewalks, vacant lots. Reportedly introduced from Asia but this conclusion is suspect; probably
native here as well.
FOOD USE: The young greens and flowerheads can
be eaten as a nibble or garnish, and can also be used
to steep a pleasant tea reminiscent of chamomile.
Primarily available from late spring through early
summer; sometimes found later, but usually dying
with dry weather.
COMMENTS: The name is derived from a supposed
similarity between the flavor of this plant's flowers
and'pineapple. Often mistakenly called "wild chamo-
mile," although the tea is similar in flavor. Pineapple
weed has been used as a traditional mosquito repel-
lent, and research has verified the effectiveness
and isolated the active chemicals. AKA Matricaria
discoidea.
458
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LACY BASAL MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR 1 Matricaria Pineapple matricarioides weed 1 Asteraceae (Aster family) QUICK CHECK: Very short; lacy divided leaves; aromatic, yellow, cone-like heads with no rays. ID difficulty Low 1. annual or winter annual. Rosette present broad on early at the spring base, plants, deeply withering by maturity. into numerous, thin, lacy segments, the ultimate lobes subdivision linear, always DESCRIPTION: Basal leaves 1.5-4" (4-10 cm) long, hairless, pointed, and often curved. each structure. The first divisions are pinnate, divisions lean), are to 12" palmate (30 cm) or divided 1-3 times There are no distinct petioles or petiolules within the leaf; but smaller nearly so. thick, solid, hairless to faintly hairy, roundish but somewhat leaves angled alternate, similar running begins at the Stems base erect of if single (when multiple or branched at the base, the outer stems with ridges tall, proportionately from each node, often with profuse ascending compound branches. Stem Rachis flat and to basal, down dividing immediately with lobes crowded at the broad and nearly clasping base. broad, not channeled, slightly keeled below, the same color as leaf divisions. Inflorescence (late spring to early summer) composite heads 5-8 mm across, solitary and terminal on long peduncles from upper branches, light greenish yellow, rounded at first becoming bluntly conical, composed of disk florets only. CONFUSING PLANTS: Chamomile M. chamomilla is a larger species that has ray and disk florets. HABITAT: Disturbed, moist ground, especially in poor soil. Common in driveways, parking areas, road shoulders, sidewalks, vacant lots. Reportedly introduced from Asia but this conclusion is suspect; probably native here as well. FOOD USE: The young greens and flowerheads can be eaten as a nibble or garnish, and can also be used to steep a pleasant tea reminiscent of chamomile. Primarily available from late spring through early summer; sometimes found later, but usually dying with dry weather. COMMENTS: The name is derived from a supposed similarity between the flavor of this plant's flowers and'pineapple. Often mistakenly called "wild chamo- mile," although the tea is similar in flavor. Pineapple weed has been used as a traditional mosquito repel- lent, and research has verified the effectiveness and isolated the active chemicals. AKA Matricaria discoidea. 458 