mm
1cm
BASALLEAVES PRESENT,
1
Fennel
LEAVES ALTERNATAC
3
2
2
Foeniculum vulgare Apiaceae (Carrot IWE-113 family)
umbels UCK of CHECK: yellow flowers; Tall, smooth, aromatic. glaucous ID difficulty herb with 2. throad
DESCRIPTION: highly aromatic Perennial forming large, multi-crowned clumps,
often ground-hugging with the on same scent as cultivated fennel. Basal leaves all parts hairless and
and two-ranked. plants that lack stems, but on plants rasette-like and
the ultimate divisions They wither by flowering. Larger leaves are 3-4 times with stems they are erect
cluster has broad thread-like, not in plane, and folded or channeled. pinnately compound,
this sheath a encircles sheath a cluster 3-10" (8-25 cm) long, the edges overlapping, with In early a blunt spring 'he outer
hollow but no channel; of inner leaves and stems, Petioles elliptic in cross section opturned with lobe a
distinctly ridged after the they are deeper than wide, smooth but with many fine ridges. Rachis in
Stem leaves first division; rachis branches are channeled. Branching begi
the stems. Stems similar to basal leaves but smaller, with wide, clasping sheaths, often in much the rachis lighter 5 2 2
age), 4-7' (1.2-2.1 m) tall and 0.6-0.9" (18-23 mm) thick, rigid, green when (dark in
glaucous, solid when young but sometimes developing a small hollow, jointed. young roundish
ridges. Branches in the upper half, these minor and strongly ascending-the form always talier
Inflorescence flat-topped compound umbels with 24-38 primary rays, these not ridged. Grear 1.1
umbellets lack bracts. Umbellets are not touching (except those in the center), but the "lowers - -
tightly together. Flowers tiny with all parts yellow. The 5 petals do not touch and are curled inward:
stamens extend well beyond them. Fruit a ribbed, elliptic schizocarp 2.5-3.5 rnm long.
HABITAT: Disturbed, dry, rocky or gravelly ground, mostly roadsides and waste areas. Introduc à
FOOD USE: All tender parts are edible. The peeled shoots are a first-rate vegetable raw or cooked
young leaves and flower buds are also good as a flavoring herb. The seeds can be gathered 'ate
season and used as a seasoning like commercial fennel seed. (Continued on the next page
mm 1cm BASALLEAVES PRESENT, 1 Fennel LEAVES ALTERNATAC 3 2 2 Foeniculum vulgare Apiaceae (Carrot IWE-113 family) umbels UCK of CHECK: yellow flowers; Tall, smooth, aromatic. glaucous ID difficulty herb with 2. throad DESCRIPTION: highly aromatic Perennial forming large, multi-crowned clumps, often ground-hugging with the on same scent as cultivated fennel. Basal leaves all parts hairless and and two-ranked. plants that lack stems, but on plants rasette-like and the ultimate divisions They wither by flowering. Larger leaves are 3-4 times with stems they are erect cluster has broad thread-like, not in plane, and folded or channeled. pinnately compound, this sheath a encircles sheath a cluster 3-10" (8-25 cm) long, the edges overlapping, with In early a blunt spring 'he outer hollow but no channel; of inner leaves and stems, Petioles elliptic in cross section opturned with lobe a distinctly ridged after the they are deeper than wide, smooth but with many fine ridges. Rachis in Stem leaves first division; rachis branches are channeled. Branching begi the stems. Stems similar to basal leaves but smaller, with wide, clasping sheaths, often in much the rachis lighter 5 2 2 age), 4-7' (1.2-2.1 m) tall and 0.6-0.9" (18-23 mm) thick, rigid, green when (dark in glaucous, solid when young but sometimes developing a small hollow, jointed. young roundish ridges. Branches in the upper half, these minor and strongly ascending-the form always talier Inflorescence flat-topped compound umbels with 24-38 primary rays, these not ridged. Grear 1.1 umbellets lack bracts. Umbellets are not touching (except those in the center), but the "lowers - - tightly together. Flowers tiny with all parts yellow. The 5 petals do not touch and are curled inward: stamens extend well beyond them. Fruit a ribbed, elliptic schizocarp 2.5-3.5 rnm long. HABITAT: Disturbed, dry, rocky or gravelly ground, mostly roadsides and waste areas. Introduc à FOOD USE: All tender parts are edible. The peeled shoots are a first-rate vegetable raw or cooked young leaves and flower buds are also good as a flavoring herb. The seeds can be gathered 'ate season and used as a seasoning like commercial fennel seed. (Continued on the next page 