BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR LACY
fibrous FOOD USE: Roots (fall) anbe ised asacooked regetable
in but like a rross Deliveen a strong " access apricalary Treyars
I flavor. Tender greens can also be used 75 a spasoning like 1001
have eaten both parts, but in limited amounts Conservation parsiel 3/2.
COMMENTS: This plant has two distinct growth forms ts different
habitats; you would hardly suspect they are the same Diant Coastal
plants are shorter, stouter, and leafer Inland populations are sparse
and rare and should generally not be gathered. Coasta plants are
robust and may be abundant; on the Pacific coast they were formerly
managed by Indigenous people as a root crop. Some potanists 33/ this
plant is found in eastern Asia. Others claim that despite the name
it is not found in China, and was named for Linnaeus misreading of
Genesee (New York) on a specimen label, and the plants found China
are just a close relative. In any case, it looks remarkably similarito
poison hemlock. This is the trickiest "look-ahke"
Be darn sure and then some before you eat it!
Small root. Late the :p becare seashore. taking the photo
(top bottom right) right) In full sun on rocky
bottom left) Tall. lanky plan! of a shady mand Dug
461
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR LACY fibrous FOOD USE: Roots (fall) anbe ised asacooked regetable in but like a rross Deliveen a strong " access apricalary Treyars I flavor. Tender greens can also be used 75 a spasoning like 1001 have eaten both parts, but in limited amounts Conservation parsiel 3/2. COMMENTS: This plant has two distinct growth forms ts different habitats; you would hardly suspect they are the same Diant Coastal plants are shorter, stouter, and leafer Inland populations are sparse and rare and should generally not be gathered. Coasta plants are robust and may be abundant; on the Pacific coast they were formerly managed by Indigenous people as a root crop. Some potanists 33/ this plant is found in eastern Asia. Others claim that despite the name it is not found in China, and was named for Linnaeus misreading of Genesee (New York) on a specimen label, and the plants found China are just a close relative. In any case, it looks remarkably similarito poison hemlock. This is the trickiest "look-ahke" Be darn sure and then some before you eat it! Small root. Late the :p becare seashore. taking the photo (top bottom right) right) In full sun on rocky bottom left) Tall. lanky plan! of a shady mand Dug 461 