LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LACY
BASAL MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR
Fennel (continued)
This is the feral version of the domestic the tender vegetable. stalks Wild are fennel even better, lacks the and enlarged plenty large leaf sheaths enough
COMMENTS: for which the cultivated plant has been bred-but widespread near the Atlantic coast salted and grows and dipped sporadically in hickory inland, oil
to but make it is much good more use of prevalent your time. on Fennel the West is Coast. Finely sliced fennel stems
is a much-loved delicacy in our house.
Hemlock parsley
2
Conioselinum chinense Apiaceae (Carrot family)
QUICK CHECK: Delicate hairless herb with lacy carrot-like leaves, thin stalks and
petioles, and umbels of tiny white flowers in late summer. ID difficulty 3+.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a whitish taproot, stems and leaves hairless. Basal
leaves 3-4 times compound/divided and persisting through flowering, few in shade but
numerous in sun, the leafy part 8-18" (20-46 long, triangular in outline. Petiole 80-160%
of blade length, twice and sometimes thrice pinnately divided. Petiole and rachises are
the hollow with a U-channel above that is whitish in the bottom. Leaflets deeply lobed, the lobe tips sharp and white,
Stems surface slightly glossy, the major veins flot to faintly depressed or the blade slightly creased along the vein.
smooth, thin and lanky, to 5' (1.5 m) tall in shade, or stout and robust and much shorter in 6-12
hollow, hairless, faintly to strongly striated, sometimes lightly coated with bloom (especially sun, in mm thick,
leaves alternate, jointed, with very long internodes, purple near the base but green above and not shade), round,
long; lower sheaths reduced, the sheaths of the upper ones enlarged, open and boat-like, purple spotted. Stem
with a slightly rounded top. The 8-20 primary rays, these distinctly channeled, cm) across on the
upper third of the stem, are less each prominent. with Inflorescence a few compound umbels 2-5" (5-13 1-2.2" (25-56 mm)
spaced in shade, but sharp-tipped linear bracts beneath each umbellet. primary rays, but
there is a whorl of several rays have minute, stiff hairs. There are no bracts curving under the upward, the umbel
umbellet, tiny with white many, crowded, and touching in full sun. Flowers (late Umbellets are few and widely
CONFUSING schizocarp 3-5 mm 5 long, the petals, edges the winged, tips strongly with 3 curved prominent inward. ridges Fruit in an the oblong, middle summer brown, to early somewhat fall) 16-34 flattened per
rachises hemlock parsley SPECIES: blooms Looks in late quite summer like poison hemlock (p. 671), and was named of for each this side.
hernlock lack has bracts the white under bottomed the great channel umbels. through of hemlock fall and parsley has and only the a few boat-like, umbels open per stem. upper resemblance, Poison sheaths. hemlock Poison but
HABITAT: furn Two tens distinct and swamps habitats inland, open especially limestone with ledges, cedar. slopes, Native. pebbles, or gravel near the coast; and
46,
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LACY BASAL MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR Fennel (continued) This is the feral version of the domestic the tender vegetable. stalks Wild are fennel even better, lacks the and enlarged plenty large leaf sheaths enough COMMENTS: for which the cultivated plant has been bred-but widespread near the Atlantic coast salted and grows and dipped sporadically in hickory inland, oil to but make it is much good more use of prevalent your time. on Fennel the West is Coast. Finely sliced fennel stems is a much-loved delicacy in our house. Hemlock parsley 2 Conioselinum chinense Apiaceae (Carrot family) QUICK CHECK: Delicate hairless herb with lacy carrot-like leaves, thin stalks and petioles, and umbels of tiny white flowers in late summer. ID difficulty 3+. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a whitish taproot, stems and leaves hairless. Basal leaves 3-4 times compound/divided and persisting through flowering, few in shade but numerous in sun, the leafy part 8-18" (20-46 long, triangular in outline. Petiole 80-160% of blade length, twice and sometimes thrice pinnately divided. Petiole and rachises are the hollow with a U-channel above that is whitish in the bottom. Leaflets deeply lobed, the lobe tips sharp and white, Stems surface slightly glossy, the major veins flot to faintly depressed or the blade slightly creased along the vein. smooth, thin and lanky, to 5' (1.5 m) tall in shade, or stout and robust and much shorter in 6-12 hollow, hairless, faintly to strongly striated, sometimes lightly coated with bloom (especially sun, in mm thick, leaves alternate, jointed, with very long internodes, purple near the base but green above and not shade), round, long; lower sheaths reduced, the sheaths of the upper ones enlarged, open and boat-like, purple spotted. Stem with a slightly rounded top. The 8-20 primary rays, these distinctly channeled, cm) across on the upper third of the stem, are less each prominent. with Inflorescence a few compound umbels 2-5" (5-13 1-2.2" (25-56 mm) spaced in shade, but sharp-tipped linear bracts beneath each umbellet. primary rays, but there is a whorl of several rays have minute, stiff hairs. There are no bracts curving under the upward, the umbel umbellet, tiny with white many, crowded, and touching in full sun. Flowers (late Umbellets are few and widely CONFUSING schizocarp 3-5 mm 5 long, the petals, edges the winged, tips strongly with 3 curved prominent inward. ridges Fruit in an the oblong, middle summer brown, to early somewhat fall) 16-34 flattened per rachises hemlock parsley SPECIES: blooms Looks in late quite summer like poison hemlock (p. 671), and was named of for each this side. hernlock lack has bracts the white under bottomed the great channel umbels. through of hemlock fall and parsley has and only the a few boat-like, umbels open per stem. upper resemblance, Poison sheaths. hemlock Poison but HABITAT: furn Two tens distinct and swamps habitats inland, open especially limestone with ledges, cedar. slopes, Native. pebbles, or gravel near the coast; and 46, 