-arrot
(family)
0
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR LACY
HABITAT: Fields, pastures, and roadsides in full sun, with moist soil Introduced
may
FOOD USE: Dig roots during the dormant season (fall through spring), wash, and use like carrots or
Use tender spring shoots as a vegetable raw or cooken. and me partnips hopped
young leaves as an herb like parsley. Seeds can he gathered in mid
summer and used as a seasoning identic al to cultivated caraway seed
COMMENTS: Caraway resembles wild carrot but is snorter and hair
less. The root is generally larger than that of wild carrot at east
proportion to the size of the plant; it IS also more tender and has better
form. It makes a nice vegetable with a sweet, aromatic flavor although
there is a faint bitter aftertaste. Caraway likes cool climates: parts
of the northern US and much of Canada it is among the most common
them
roadside weeds. This plant is the same as the cultivated caraway: all
culinary uses besides the seeds have been nearly forgotten
-arrot (family) 0 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR LACY HABITAT: Fields, pastures, and roadsides in full sun, with moist soil Introduced may FOOD USE: Dig roots during the dormant season (fall through spring), wash, and use like carrots or Use tender spring shoots as a vegetable raw or cooken. and me partnips hopped young leaves as an herb like parsley. Seeds can he gathered in mid summer and used as a seasoning identic al to cultivated caraway seed COMMENTS: Caraway resembles wild carrot but is snorter and hair less. The root is generally larger than that of wild carrot at east proportion to the size of the plant; it IS also more tender and has better form. It makes a nice vegetable with a sweet, aromatic flavor although there is a faint bitter aftertaste. Caraway likes cool climates: parts of the northern US and much of Canada it is among the most common them roadside weeds. This plant is the same as the cultivated caraway: all culinary uses besides the seeds have been nearly forgotten 