BASAL-LEAVESPRESENT.LLINE LEAVES OR LACY
IWE-84
3
2
4
Caraway carvi Apiaceae 2 (Carrot family)
Carum Hairless plant with finely-cut, multi-compound umbels. ID leaves difficulty with 3. linear lobes,
QUICK CHECK: white flowers in compound
DESCRIPTION: the leaves full and Biennial, fluffy; all parts hairless. Taproot thick, bumpy, strongly aromatic. tapered, Basal with leaves a dominant 6-13,
central root, whitish outside and inside, and less the than surface half as wide. There are Most no widened leaves sec- are
tions in a rosette, to the leaf-all 5-9" and (13-23 once leaflets, cm) deeply long lobes, lobed, and the divisions final divisions are thin flattened creased and linear. down in any the dimension center. Main since veins the rachises of each lobe and
are twice depressed. compound The leaf with has a each full and other. fluffy Leaf look, undersides not being are tinted silver-gray. of the Basal blade leaves length wither on lower by fruiting. leaves.
Petioles solid, deeply channeled. Stems solid in the half,
leaflets are out V-channeled, of plane not winged on the margin, light green, 80-130% or with a thin hollow in the center of the
upper stem, 18-32" (45-80 wide cm) tall. Stem surface is light green, faintly and dark Stem
Rachis and rachis branches are also tall and 9-13 mm thick, jointed, zigzag, branching bloom-coated, widely finely ridged, upper and
the mature form almost as Cross section as of shoot shows 3 color zones alternating light and ribbon-like, green. the flat
striped with darker green. lower ones with a semi-translucent sheath at the base, flat, broad, Inflorescence several
leaves alternate, white inside the with prominent ridged veins. Upper leaves are greatly reduced. mm) across, usually not
part nearly compound umbeis 2-2.8" (5-7 cm) wide, the umbellets 0.5-0.7" (13-18 the first junction,
flat-topped except sometimes in the center. The great umbel has a whorl of linear bracts at the
often touching hidden by being pressed against the rays. Flowers (early summer) tiny, often not touching, center
dull yellow-green or brown. The 5 white petals are almost equal in size and have claw-like tips curved back
toward the center. Fruit elliptic schizocarps 2-3 mm long with darkened ridges, brown when mature (identical
to cultivated caraway).
CONFUSING PLANTS: Wild carrot is hairy and taller, less branched, and has fruits with hooked hairs; it has
less of a clasping sheath at the leaf base. Cow parsley has hairy stems and leaves. Poison hemlock (p. 671) is
much taller with a hollow stem, very heavy bloom, and purple spots.
462
BASAL-LEAVESPRESENT.LLINE LEAVES OR LACY IWE-84 3 2 4 Caraway carvi Apiaceae 2 (Carrot family) Carum Hairless plant with finely-cut, multi-compound umbels. ID leaves difficulty with 3. linear lobes, QUICK CHECK: white flowers in compound DESCRIPTION: the leaves full and Biennial, fluffy; all parts hairless. Taproot thick, bumpy, strongly aromatic. tapered, Basal with leaves a dominant 6-13, central root, whitish outside and inside, and less the than surface half as wide. There are Most no widened leaves sec- are tions in a rosette, to the leaf-all 5-9" and (13-23 once leaflets, cm) deeply long lobes, lobed, and the divisions final divisions are thin flattened creased and linear. down in any the dimension center. Main since veins the rachises of each lobe and are twice depressed. compound The leaf with has a each full and other. fluffy Leaf look, undersides not being are tinted silver-gray. of the Basal blade leaves length wither on lower by fruiting. leaves. Petioles solid, deeply channeled. Stems solid in the half, leaflets are out V-channeled, of plane not winged on the margin, light green, 80-130% or with a thin hollow in the center of the upper stem, 18-32" (45-80 wide cm) tall. Stem surface is light green, faintly and dark Stem Rachis and rachis branches are also tall and 9-13 mm thick, jointed, zigzag, branching bloom-coated, widely finely ridged, upper and the mature form almost as Cross section as of shoot shows 3 color zones alternating light and ribbon-like, green. the flat striped with darker green. lower ones with a semi-translucent sheath at the base, flat, broad, Inflorescence several leaves alternate, white inside the with prominent ridged veins. Upper leaves are greatly reduced. mm) across, usually not part nearly compound umbeis 2-2.8" (5-7 cm) wide, the umbellets 0.5-0.7" (13-18 the first junction, flat-topped except sometimes in the center. The great umbel has a whorl of linear bracts at the often touching hidden by being pressed against the rays. Flowers (early summer) tiny, often not touching, center dull yellow-green or brown. The 5 white petals are almost equal in size and have claw-like tips curved back toward the center. Fruit elliptic schizocarps 2-3 mm long with darkened ridges, brown when mature (identical to cultivated caraway). CONFUSING PLANTS: Wild carrot is hairy and taller, less branched, and has fruits with hooked hairs; it has less of a clasping sheath at the leaf base. Cow parsley has hairy stems and leaves. Poison hemlock (p. 671) is much taller with a hollow stem, very heavy bloom, and purple spots. 462 