LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LACY
BASAL MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR
3
Perideridia Eastern yampa americana 3 Apiaceae (Carrot family)
QUICK CHECK Hairless, glam one, delic ate plant with deeply cut leaves and compound
of white flowers ID difficulty 3+.
unbels back by midsummer, all parts hairless. Tubers usually (25-43 in a mm) pair,
2-4 (5-10 cm) with cracked brown papery coating that rubs off to inside the a flesh,
DESCRIPTION: underground. Perennial dying shaped like a tooth or elongated teardrop, 1-1.7" reveal white
surface with white, and carroty-aromatic. A ring of small roots radiates crown, stem base appearing near the in top earl.
long, pointed horizontal at the tip, lenticels. a There is a faint ring of yellow channels at the
which is brittle, starchy, do not emanate from the tuber sides or tip. Basal leaves usually 3 per together in a whitish
these tubers-roots the stem appears, attached 2-4" (5-10 cm) underground, wrapped at the surface.
spring but with wilting broad as sheaths (the outer of which are free and not attached to leaves) then spreading Ultimate divisions
The bundle blade is 4-10" (10-25 cm) long, twice compound and then once deeply lobed/divided. or
lobes are 2-8 mm wide and linear, not toothed, blunt, ending in a faint straw-colored nipple tip. The major vein of
each lobe is flat to faintly depressed. Petioles 25-40% of blade length, broadly sheathed/winged underground
but tapering quickly to a channeled top above ground, solid. Stems thin and lanky, 1.5-5' (45-150 cm) tall and
5-8 mm thick, round, hollow, single, erect, jointed, with long internodes of 10-15" (25-38 cm), unbranched
below the inflorescence. The surface is uniformly green, very smooth, and glaucous with notable white powder.
Stem leaves alternate, the petioles equal in length to the blades on lower leaves, reduced upward to sessile or
nearly so, the sheath margins overlapping and incurved to form a tapered scroll before uniting to form a hollow
petiole. Uppermost leaves near the inflorescence branches are tiny and 3-lobed or linear. Inflorescence 3-5
round-topped, symmetrical compound umbels on broadly spreading branches at the top of the stem, the umbellets
not touching in bloom. Rays 6-20, 0.8-1.8"
(20-45 mm) long in bloom, longer in fruit.
Great umbels 1.8-2.8" (45-70 mm) across
in bloom, 4-7" (10-18 cm) across in fruit.
Peduncles and pedicels are very thin. There
are usually 2 tiny linear bracts below the
great umbel; these are shed as the fruit
matures. Umbellets have a whorl of 8-14
tiny finear bracts and are tightly packed
with 14-26 flowers. Flowers (early summer)
about 2 mm across, white with 5 petals,
these narrowed abruptly to needle-like tips
that are strongly incurved. Fruit a 3-5 mm
elliptic schizocarp, smooth and hairless,
flattened, with no wing on the outside.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Poison hem-
luck (p 671) is much larger with numer-
ous umbels per plant; it has leaf divisions
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LACY BASAL MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR 3 Perideridia Eastern yampa americana 3 Apiaceae (Carrot family) QUICK CHECK Hairless, glam one, delic ate plant with deeply cut leaves and compound of white flowers ID difficulty 3+. unbels back by midsummer, all parts hairless. Tubers usually (25-43 in a mm) pair, 2-4 (5-10 cm) with cracked brown papery coating that rubs off to inside the a flesh, DESCRIPTION: underground. Perennial dying shaped like a tooth or elongated teardrop, 1-1.7" reveal white surface with white, and carroty-aromatic. A ring of small roots radiates crown, stem base appearing near the in top earl. long, pointed horizontal at the tip, lenticels. a There is a faint ring of yellow channels at the which is brittle, starchy, do not emanate from the tuber sides or tip. Basal leaves usually 3 per together in a whitish these tubers-roots the stem appears, attached 2-4" (5-10 cm) underground, wrapped at the surface. spring but with wilting broad as sheaths (the outer of which are free and not attached to leaves) then spreading Ultimate divisions The bundle blade is 4-10" (10-25 cm) long, twice compound and then once deeply lobed/divided. or lobes are 2-8 mm wide and linear, not toothed, blunt, ending in a faint straw-colored nipple tip. The major vein of each lobe is flat to faintly depressed. Petioles 25-40% of blade length, broadly sheathed/winged underground but tapering quickly to a channeled top above ground, solid. Stems thin and lanky, 1.5-5' (45-150 cm) tall and 5-8 mm thick, round, hollow, single, erect, jointed, with long internodes of 10-15" (25-38 cm), unbranched below the inflorescence. The surface is uniformly green, very smooth, and glaucous with notable white powder. Stem leaves alternate, the petioles equal in length to the blades on lower leaves, reduced upward to sessile or nearly so, the sheath margins overlapping and incurved to form a tapered scroll before uniting to form a hollow petiole. Uppermost leaves near the inflorescence branches are tiny and 3-lobed or linear. Inflorescence 3-5 round-topped, symmetrical compound umbels on broadly spreading branches at the top of the stem, the umbellets not touching in bloom. Rays 6-20, 0.8-1.8" (20-45 mm) long in bloom, longer in fruit. Great umbels 1.8-2.8" (45-70 mm) across in bloom, 4-7" (10-18 cm) across in fruit. Peduncles and pedicels are very thin. There are usually 2 tiny linear bracts below the great umbel; these are shed as the fruit matures. Umbellets have a whorl of 8-14 tiny finear bracts and are tightly packed with 14-26 flowers. Flowers (early summer) about 2 mm across, white with 5 petals, these narrowed abruptly to needle-like tips that are strongly incurved. Fruit a 3-5 mm elliptic schizocarp, smooth and hairless, flattened, with no wing on the outside. CONFUSING PLANTS: Poison hem- luck (p 671) is much larger with numer- ous umbels per plant; it has leaf divisions 