mm
1cm
BASALLEAVI-COMPOUND,
without
linear
lobes,
and
LEAVES LIKE OR LACY
coating hemlock are of (p. white 668) bloom, can have and the similar the lobes underground tubers, or teeth are portion sharp is tipped a large The taproot stem is purple spotted
670) very is different. aquatic, Yampa is usually wilting but and water dead hemlock tubers have Small roots sper iment leaves
has toothed leaves, and bulblets in upper before leaf water hemlock blooms voon So 'nem and the
HABITAT: drained calcium-rich Open woodlands, soils. Native. blufftops, prairies, glades, forest axils; edges, its meadows, roots are enlarged roadsides: but in -779 rich no where
FOOD holes, Because and USE: the plant From is early killed summer by harvest, to autumn always the scatter roots can be gathered and used as a cooked 001 well.
tender. Conservation replant any 3/2. small rootlets. Young greens in seeds spring from taste nearby remarkably mature like plants parsiey on the but exc vegetable are avation Joer
COMMENTS: This obscure edible is a gairdneri relative of the better known and more common
plant of the Rocky Mountains. A lover of the best yampa farm Perideridia
in has been eliminated from most of its range by agriculture 30% this
many areas is rare and protected; harvest is only responsible when and
you is are propagating and managing it. This superb native food plant
worthy of broad use as an edible ground cover in yards orchards
and nut groves. AKA thicket parsley.
mm 1cm BASALLEAVI-COMPOUND, without linear lobes, and LEAVES LIKE OR LACY coating hemlock are of (p. white 668) bloom, can have and the similar the lobes underground tubers, or teeth are portion sharp is tipped a large The taproot stem is purple spotted 670) very is different. aquatic, Yampa is usually wilting but and water dead hemlock tubers have Small roots sper iment leaves has toothed leaves, and bulblets in upper before leaf water hemlock blooms voon So 'nem and the HABITAT: drained calcium-rich Open woodlands, soils. Native. blufftops, prairies, glades, forest axils; edges, its meadows, roots are enlarged roadsides: but in -779 rich no where FOOD holes, Because and USE: the plant From is early killed summer by harvest, to autumn always the scatter roots can be gathered and used as a cooked 001 well. tender. Conservation replant any 3/2. small rootlets. Young greens in seeds spring from taste nearby remarkably mature like plants parsiey on the but exc vegetable are avation Joer COMMENTS: This obscure edible is a gairdneri relative of the better known and more common plant of the Rocky Mountains. A lover of the best yampa farm Perideridia in has been eliminated from most of its range by agriculture 30% this many areas is rare and protected; harvest is only responsible when and you is are propagating and managing it. This superb native food plant worthy of broad use as an edible ground cover in yards orchards and nut groves. AKA thicket parsley. 