BASALLEAVI-COMPOUND,
7 Broad-leaf musineon
LEAVES LIKE OR LACY
Musineon divaricatum Apiaceae 1 (Carrot family)
QUICK impound CHECK: umbels Low of tiny plant yellow with flowers. thick, broad, ID difficulty shiny, divided 2. basal leaves and are
DESCRIPTION: vertical Taproot stem rather starting fibrous, Low a perennial few inches spring underground ephemeral that rises from to a taproot, the There is a subterraneon
long, long-triangular somewhat enlarged, the surface brown. surface where it bears leaves.
short pinnately prairie lobed or divided in outline, again. hugging The broadest the ground, divisions first pinnately Basal leaves divided, 4-6" then (10-15 deeply cm)
are
3-8
few to Stem multiple, a ridges, sheath, raised large, leaves almost above very fleshy blunt smaller, ephemerals short, solid and teeth rather 1-4" depressed with alternate with than (2.5-10 a in pinhole light-colored the papery, below. or carrot so hollow, long, tapering Petiole close family. nipple spreading the as about to to surface Blades tips. appear a broad as to Veins glossy, with ascending, long paired; U-channel. scattered offset as thick, the the mm often by blade, hairless petioles Rachis color, stiff across-much splitting has hairs. with (or sections scattered into nearly Some occasional 2 equal wider are $0) plants stiff winged. on forks. than hairs; hairs; appear both with those Stems they sides the stemless 'ow, of are base with other of "ned flat is a
are
deeper
than
wide
and
deeply
channeled. Inflorescence a com
pound umbel on a solid peduncle
that may be prostrate or upright
(but curved), 1-5" (2 5-13 cm) long,
with fine ridges. One of the outer Dri-
mary rays is sometimes widened and
slightly winged. There are no bracts
under the great umbel, but under
the umbellets they are numerous
and linear. The umbellets and flo-
rets are packed. Flowers tiny. about
1 mm across, with 5 yellow petais
curled in to meet in the center
(looking almost like an unopened
bud), and yellow anthers and tila-
ments. Fruit a somewhat flattened.
strongly ridged schizocarp.
HABITAT: Dry prairies on soil that
is not too sandy. Native
FOOD USE: Roots are edible
cooked but are on the tough side.
The leaves can be used as an herb.
Conservation 3/1.
COMMENTS: This beautiful little
plant is easy to recognize. with
its shiny, plastic-looking leaves.
It sometimes turns hillsides yel-
low in spring. You might encoun-
ter plants that seem intermediate
between this and its close relative
Musineon tenuifolium (p. 294). Both
species are too strong (leaves) and
tough (roots) to be used in quan-
tity but are pleasant when used
sparingly. This plant doesn really
have a common name but IS some-
times AKA leafy musineon or leafy
wildparsley.
467
BASALLEAVI-COMPOUND, 7 Broad-leaf musineon LEAVES LIKE OR LACY Musineon divaricatum Apiaceae 1 (Carrot family) QUICK impound CHECK: umbels Low of tiny plant yellow with flowers. thick, broad, ID difficulty shiny, divided 2. basal leaves and are DESCRIPTION: vertical Taproot stem rather starting fibrous, Low a perennial few inches spring underground ephemeral that rises from to a taproot, the There is a subterraneon long, long-triangular somewhat enlarged, the surface brown. surface where it bears leaves. short pinnately prairie lobed or divided in outline, again. hugging The broadest the ground, divisions first pinnately Basal leaves divided, 4-6" then (10-15 deeply cm) are 3-8 few to Stem multiple, a ridges, sheath, raised large, leaves almost above very fleshy blunt smaller, ephemerals short, solid and teeth rather 1-4" depressed with alternate with than (2.5-10 a in pinhole light-colored the papery, below. or carrot so hollow, long, tapering Petiole close family. nipple spreading the as about to to surface Blades tips. appear a broad as to Veins glossy, with ascending, long paired; U-channel. scattered offset as thick, the the mm often by blade, hairless petioles Rachis color, stiff across-much splitting has hairs. with (or sections scattered into nearly Some occasional 2 equal wider are $0) plants stiff winged. on forks. than hairs; hairs; appear both with those Stems they sides the stemless 'ow, of are base with other of "ned flat is a are deeper than wide and deeply channeled. Inflorescence a com pound umbel on a solid peduncle that may be prostrate or upright (but curved), 1-5" (2 5-13 cm) long, with fine ridges. One of the outer Dri- mary rays is sometimes widened and slightly winged. There are no bracts under the great umbel, but under the umbellets they are numerous and linear. The umbellets and flo- rets are packed. Flowers tiny. about 1 mm across, with 5 yellow petais curled in to meet in the center (looking almost like an unopened bud), and yellow anthers and tila- ments. Fruit a somewhat flattened. strongly ridged schizocarp. HABITAT: Dry prairies on soil that is not too sandy. Native FOOD USE: Roots are edible cooked but are on the tough side. The leaves can be used as an herb. Conservation 3/1. COMMENTS: This beautiful little plant is easy to recognize. with its shiny, plastic-looking leaves. It sometimes turns hillsides yel- low in spring. You might encoun- ter plants that seem intermediate between this and its close relative Musineon tenuifolium (p. 294). Both species are too strong (leaves) and tough (roots) to be used in quan- tity but are pleasant when used sparingly. This plant doesn really have a common name but IS some- times AKA leafy musineon or leafy wildparsley. 467 