LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LACY
MULTI-COMPOUND, BASAL FERN-LIKE OR
Harbinger Erigenia bulbosa Apiaceae (Carrot family)
of spring
3
2
QUICK CHECK: Tiny forest herb with carrot-like, hairless leaves and umbels of 5-petaled
white flowers ephemeral from an enlarged, roundish root plants. 9-14 They mm
in early spring. ID difficulty 3.
DESCRIPTION: Very small usually spring flowering plants, 2 on non-flowering each
are hairless, 3-7" dividing 3 ways; after this they are palmately or pinnately raised above, the lobe
in diameter. Basal (8-18 leaves cm) long and 1 on about as wide, the rachis first dividing divided 3 ways, once or
branch again the major veins flat or faintly U-channeled, tips blunt or pointed solid or
with a tiny nipple. branches are similar but distally become much smaller, double- to
twice. Blade smooth, Petiole hairless, usually glossy, maroon (at least at the base) shallowly more and broadly broadly channeled. Stems up
with a tiny hollow; (5-13 rachis cm) tall, unbranched, faintly ridged, hairless. Stem leaf single, umbel with 3 (rarely 4) rays
pinnate, just Umbellets each have 3-8 tiny flowers on very short pedicels; toward the usually
3 per plant, borne 2-5" beneath the great umbel. Inflorescence a small compound beneath these are
at the oblanceolate first juncture. bracts. Flowers (early spring) have 5 white, obovate petals, not curled in center,
that 1~2 contrast with the large purple-brown anthers. Fruit a schizocarp, broader than long, flattened, notched,
with 2 white "whiskers" curling around the edge.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Dutchman's breeches and squirrel's corn (genus Dicentra, probably poisonous) may
share the habitat. Dicentra leaves are more palmately divided, balanced on more erect petioles; the surfaces
have a bloom giving them a grayish cast, especially below. The flowers and USOs are entirely different. Spread-
ing chervil (p. 475) has hairy petioles.
HABITAT: Rich, moist deciduous forests with
diverse spring ephemerals, especially small
floodplains and lower slopes. Native.
FOOD USE: The rounded, enlarged root tastes
like carrot or parsnip. Usually close to the surface,
it can be eaten at any time but is easiest to find
in spring when the plant is up. The greens have
a pleasant parsley-like flavor. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: Harbinger of spring is easily over-
harvested and is protected in many areas; collect
only where abundant and do so judiciously and
sparingly. This sweet little vegetable reminds
me of dwarf ginseng (p. 511) but is far better.
AKA pepper-and-salt.
466
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, LACY MULTI-COMPOUND, BASAL FERN-LIKE OR Harbinger Erigenia bulbosa Apiaceae (Carrot family) of spring 3 2 QUICK CHECK: Tiny forest herb with carrot-like, hairless leaves and umbels of 5-petaled white flowers ephemeral from an enlarged, roundish root plants. 9-14 They mm in early spring. ID difficulty 3. DESCRIPTION: Very small usually spring flowering plants, 2 on non-flowering each are hairless, 3-7" dividing 3 ways; after this they are palmately or pinnately raised above, the lobe in diameter. Basal (8-18 leaves cm) long and 1 on about as wide, the rachis first dividing divided 3 ways, once or branch again the major veins flat or faintly U-channeled, tips blunt or pointed solid or with a tiny nipple. branches are similar but distally become much smaller, double- to twice. Blade smooth, Petiole hairless, usually glossy, maroon (at least at the base) shallowly more and broadly broadly channeled. Stems up with a tiny hollow; (5-13 rachis cm) tall, unbranched, faintly ridged, hairless. Stem leaf single, umbel with 3 (rarely 4) rays pinnate, just Umbellets each have 3-8 tiny flowers on very short pedicels; toward the usually 3 per plant, borne 2-5" beneath the great umbel. Inflorescence a small compound beneath these are at the oblanceolate first juncture. bracts. Flowers (early spring) have 5 white, obovate petals, not curled in center, that 1~2 contrast with the large purple-brown anthers. Fruit a schizocarp, broader than long, flattened, notched, with 2 white "whiskers" curling around the edge. CONFUSING PLANTS: Dutchman's breeches and squirrel's corn (genus Dicentra, probably poisonous) may share the habitat. Dicentra leaves are more palmately divided, balanced on more erect petioles; the surfaces have a bloom giving them a grayish cast, especially below. The flowers and USOs are entirely different. Spread- ing chervil (p. 475) has hairy petioles. HABITAT: Rich, moist deciduous forests with diverse spring ephemerals, especially small floodplains and lower slopes. Native. FOOD USE: The rounded, enlarged root tastes like carrot or parsnip. Usually close to the surface, it can be eaten at any time but is easiest to find in spring when the plant is up. The greens have a pleasant parsley-like flavor. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: Harbinger of spring is easily over- harvested and is protected in many areas; collect only where abundant and do so judiciously and sparingly. This sweet little vegetable reminds me of dwarf ginseng (p. 511) but is far better. AKA pepper-and-salt. 466 