)
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES
MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE ALTERNATE, OR LACY
9
Cow parsley
1
2
Anthriscus
sylvestris
Apiaceae
(Carrot
family)
umbels; UICK CHECK: stem Chest-high with carrot-like leaves and tiny white Howers 110
ridged and hairy at the base. ID difficulty 3.
DESCRIPTION: dark Perennial spreading by forming new adjacent root crowns, the
very green. Sap milky. Taproots white inside and outside, carroty-scented, herbage
(20-36 cm) long and up to 1,2" (3 cm) thick, often branching near the top. Basal leaves 8-14"
the per rosette, wedge-shaped in outline, 8-20" (20-50 long, 2-3 times pinnately 5-7
divisions often widely spaced and much smaller toward the tip. At the first and compound, second
Rapidly
always sessile. The first two large segments are out of plane with the rest of the blade. Ultimate expanding. leaflets
levels the divisions are stalked proximally, becoming sessile distally; 3rd level divisions are
deeply pinnately lobed. Blades are scarcely hairy above but are hairy on the margins and below; rachises are are
also hairy. Midveins and main veins of each lobe are depressed. Petioles 100-180% of blade length, sheath-like
and purplish at the base, thick-walled and hollow except near the base (which is solid). The surface is stiff-
hairy, the hairs pointing toward the base-especially on the sheath. Petioles have a smooth-bottomed channel
that is glossy and bubbly looking, weakly keeled beneath, with many small ridges. Stems 2-4.5 (60-140
tall, often multiple, branching widely, zigzag, jointed, enlarging slightly below each node, with a small, hollow
center near the base of the shoot. This hollow enlarges upward and with age. The surface is green (sometimes
reddish near the base or nodes) with 12-20 flat-topped ridges, often with smaller ridges between them: Near
the base, stems have many short, stiff hairs pointing downward; these become sparser going up the stalk Upper
branches are nearly hairless. Stems die back in mid summer. Stem leaves similar to basal but smaller and
less hairy, with petioles reduced. Inflorescence widely branching with multiple umbel-like junctures of 3 or more
branches, each juncture with a reduced but still compound leaf, the branches hairless except at sheaths, terminat-
ing in flat-topped compound umbels 2-3" (5-8 cm) wide with up to 18 rays. Umbellets slightly spaced. but the
10-20 flowers within them are densely packed. There are no bracts under the great umbel. but each umbeller
has a whorl of 5-8 small, hairy, ovate bracts with a sharp acuminate tip. A lone compound umbel often arises
from a lower branch juncture; these open first. Flowers (late spring to early summer) 2-3 mm across, white,
with five asymmetrical petals (those on the outside of the umbellet much larger than those on the inside).
Petals are broad at the tip and often notched, but not folded or curled inward. (Continued on the next page.)
) 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE ALTERNATE, OR LACY 9 Cow parsley 1 2 Anthriscus sylvestris Apiaceae (Carrot family) umbels; UICK CHECK: stem Chest-high with carrot-like leaves and tiny white Howers 110 ridged and hairy at the base. ID difficulty 3. DESCRIPTION: dark Perennial spreading by forming new adjacent root crowns, the very green. Sap milky. Taproots white inside and outside, carroty-scented, herbage (20-36 cm) long and up to 1,2" (3 cm) thick, often branching near the top. Basal leaves 8-14" the per rosette, wedge-shaped in outline, 8-20" (20-50 long, 2-3 times pinnately 5-7 divisions often widely spaced and much smaller toward the tip. At the first and compound, second Rapidly always sessile. The first two large segments are out of plane with the rest of the blade. Ultimate expanding. leaflets levels the divisions are stalked proximally, becoming sessile distally; 3rd level divisions are deeply pinnately lobed. Blades are scarcely hairy above but are hairy on the margins and below; rachises are are also hairy. Midveins and main veins of each lobe are depressed. Petioles 100-180% of blade length, sheath-like and purplish at the base, thick-walled and hollow except near the base (which is solid). The surface is stiff- hairy, the hairs pointing toward the base-especially on the sheath. Petioles have a smooth-bottomed channel that is glossy and bubbly looking, weakly keeled beneath, with many small ridges. Stems 2-4.5 (60-140 tall, often multiple, branching widely, zigzag, jointed, enlarging slightly below each node, with a small, hollow center near the base of the shoot. This hollow enlarges upward and with age. The surface is green (sometimes reddish near the base or nodes) with 12-20 flat-topped ridges, often with smaller ridges between them: Near the base, stems have many short, stiff hairs pointing downward; these become sparser going up the stalk Upper branches are nearly hairless. Stems die back in mid summer. Stem leaves similar to basal but smaller and less hairy, with petioles reduced. Inflorescence widely branching with multiple umbel-like junctures of 3 or more branches, each juncture with a reduced but still compound leaf, the branches hairless except at sheaths, terminat- ing in flat-topped compound umbels 2-3" (5-8 cm) wide with up to 18 rays. Umbellets slightly spaced. but the 10-20 flowers within them are densely packed. There are no bracts under the great umbel. but each umbeller has a whorl of 5-8 small, hairy, ovate bracts with a sharp acuminate tip. A lone compound umbel often arises from a lower branch juncture; these open first. Flowers (late spring to early summer) 2-3 mm across, white, with five asymmetrical petals (those on the outside of the umbellet much larger than those on the inside). Petals are broad at the tip and often notched, but not folded or curled inward. (Continued on the next page.) 