MASAL-COMPOUNDSENT,LEAVES
OR ALTERNATE, LACY
8 White prairie orientale biscuitroot Apiaceae (Carrot - family)
2
2
Lomatium CHECK: Low carroty plant made flowers gray with from dark fine maroon white hairs; centers. leaves ID crowded difficulty on 2.
QUICK lower stem; crowded Low perennial umbels of spring white ephemeral from cm) an enlarged underground. taproot. The Roots surface whitish gradu- is
DESCRIPTION: ally thicken, and rough, terminating the skin at a brittle club-like and tip waxy, 5-9" peeling underground (13-23 neatly and to reveal growing a smooth to the surface in
before bumpy interior. spreading, Basal leaves the ground-hugging divisions rosette-like, often or beginning widely ascending, spaced, 3-7" then (8-18 deeply cm) long, pinnately the long-elliptic tips lobed abruptly (distally) outline; pointed or first to fully blunt. pinnately divided The
compound (proximally), with the final divisions with long lobes hair often giving curling a dull upward, grayish appearance. Rachis naked for and half veins. its
surface is covered with it has fine, a long, soft, broad, dense, whitish tapered sheath with papery edges and slightly purple underground, highlights extending
length; at the base usually multiple, beginning ground-hugging (without),
Beyond the cm) sheath above it is the deeply soil, 3-4 channeled. mm thick, Stems erect (in competition) few or sometimes and much smaller, alternate, with the
1-5" (5-13 soft-hairy. Stem leaves wrapped
hollow, faintly ridged folded and upward lined, and minutely touching or nearly so; there is usually a wide, small with axillary no inflorescence bracts underneath, at
sheath margins crowded compound umbels to 1.5" (4 cm) deeply than the stem.
the end of a proportionately clusters are also often present. Umbellets small and crowded white petals strongly
in this sheath. Inflorescence thick, naked peduncle 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, grooved with more a whorl of narrowly lan-
curled ceolate inward tapered and meeting in the center; maroon anthers give it a bicolored look. Fruit an elliptic
Reduced axillary bracts with whitish margins behind the rays. Flowers 2 mm wide with 5 and only
slightly flattened schizocarp.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Cymopterus montanus (p. 296) has the same grayish look but is even smaller and has
no stem above ground. The leaves are more compact and ruffled, and less woolly. Its umbellets are almost
enveloped by papery bracts, and the fruit has broad wings.
HABITAT: Dry prairies with sandy or gravelly soil. Native.
FOOD USE: Although the roots are rather small and hard to dig, they are starchy and have good flavor.
Greens make a good parsley/lovage
type herb. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: This species is more
common than its relative L. foenicula-
ceum because it inhabits poorer soils
not put to the plow. It can do well in light
grazing, but disappears under heavy
use. Gather judiciously and spread
seeds to avoid overharvest. AKA white
prairie parsley.
468
MASAL-COMPOUNDSENT,LEAVES OR ALTERNATE, LACY 8 White prairie orientale biscuitroot Apiaceae (Carrot - family) 2 2 Lomatium CHECK: Low carroty plant made flowers gray with from dark fine maroon white hairs; centers. leaves ID crowded difficulty on 2. QUICK lower stem; crowded Low perennial umbels of spring white ephemeral from cm) an enlarged underground. taproot. The Roots surface whitish gradu- is DESCRIPTION: ally thicken, and rough, terminating the skin at a brittle club-like and tip waxy, 5-9" peeling underground (13-23 neatly and to reveal growing a smooth to the surface in before bumpy interior. spreading, Basal leaves the ground-hugging divisions rosette-like, often or beginning widely ascending, spaced, 3-7" then (8-18 deeply cm) long, pinnately the long-elliptic tips lobed abruptly (distally) outline; pointed or first to fully blunt. pinnately divided The compound (proximally), with the final divisions with long lobes hair often giving curling a dull upward, grayish appearance. Rachis naked for and half veins. its surface is covered with it has fine, a long, soft, broad, dense, whitish tapered sheath with papery edges and slightly purple underground, highlights extending length; at the base usually multiple, beginning ground-hugging (without), Beyond the cm) sheath above it is the deeply soil, 3-4 channeled. mm thick, Stems erect (in competition) few or sometimes and much smaller, alternate, with the 1-5" (5-13 soft-hairy. Stem leaves wrapped hollow, faintly ridged folded and upward lined, and minutely touching or nearly so; there is usually a wide, small with axillary no inflorescence bracts underneath, at sheath margins crowded compound umbels to 1.5" (4 cm) deeply than the stem. the end of a proportionately clusters are also often present. Umbellets small and crowded white petals strongly in this sheath. Inflorescence thick, naked peduncle 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, grooved with more a whorl of narrowly lan- curled ceolate inward tapered and meeting in the center; maroon anthers give it a bicolored look. Fruit an elliptic Reduced axillary bracts with whitish margins behind the rays. Flowers 2 mm wide with 5 and only slightly flattened schizocarp. CONFUSING PLANTS: Cymopterus montanus (p. 296) has the same grayish look but is even smaller and has no stem above ground. The leaves are more compact and ruffled, and less woolly. Its umbellets are almost enveloped by papery bracts, and the fruit has broad wings. HABITAT: Dry prairies with sandy or gravelly soil. Native. FOOD USE: Although the roots are rather small and hard to dig, they are starchy and have good flavor. Greens make a good parsley/lovage type herb. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: This species is more common than its relative L. foenicula- ceum because it inhabits poorer soils not put to the plow. It can do well in light grazing, but disappears under heavy use. Gather judiciously and spread seeds to avoid overharvest. AKA white prairie parsley. 468 