MULTI-COMPOUND, BASAL LEAVES FERN-LIKE OR LACY
Fruit hairless Cow parsley (except very and (continued) minutely narrowed on the to beaks), a double held beak-like vertical, tip. looking After dying like 2 tubes and drying fused they on the turn long blackish edge,
CONFUSING and slightly the wider 2 halves PLANTS: at hang the base together Wild carrot loosely smaller. has by Poison larger, the tip. more hemlock crowded (p. 671) compound has leaves umbels of similar subtended shape but by many is hairless long
with bracts, a smooth, and the hollow leaves stem are much coated in bloom, woods, and forest is much edges. taller. An invasive from Europe abundant. that is spreading I rapidly
HABITAT: Roadsides, this pastures, has a disjunct open and spotty distribution but is locally very
in some USE: areas, Roots plant are remotely carroty but the flavor is greens very strong in spring and can they be are used tough-not as an herb recommended. in soups, cas-
FOOD If you eat them do one it would sparingly use parsley. and well-cooked. Shoots can Tender be used as a vegetable raw or cooked after Well the known skin is peeled. among
seroles, etc., as relative to the cultivated chervil Anthriscus cerefolium. parts of North
COMMENTS: This where is a very it is close native and abundant, this species is rapidly increasing stems are in some distinctive. WARN-
America. foragers in The England leaves resemble those of poison hemlock-but the ridged, hairy
ING: The juice is probably phototoxic. (See p. 23.)
10 Erect hedge parsley
1
Torilis japonica Apiaceae (Carrot family)
QUICK CHECK: Knee to thigh-high carrot-like plant with leaves and stems roughened
by stiff hairs; flowers white, clusters small, fruits stick-tights. ID difficulty 3.
DESCRIPTION: Winter annual. Rosette leaves few, 2-6" (5-15 cm) long, twice pinnately
compound and once deeply pinnately lobed; these leaves wither by flowering. Stem erect,
jointed, strongly zigzag when young, lanky at maturity, 2-4.5' (60-140 cm) tall and 6-14
mm thick, solid, round with numerous fine ridges, these becoming narrower but more
prominent on the upper stem. Stems are covered with short, stiff hairs appressed toward
Composite range
the base in the lower part. Branches large and often several at or near the base, fewer
of T. arvensis and
the above, base strongly ascending. The upper internodes are long and naked. Stem leaves
T. japonica.
inrolled, are much larger than rosette leaves, to 12" (30 cm) long. They have sheaths near
channeled. very Petioles thin and transparent be near the edge, gradually transforming into a petiole up that to is 0.8" solid (2 cm) wide
the rachis branches are may as long as the blade but get shorter going up the stem. After and deeply
the tip. Blade triangular channeled in outline less deeply. Petioles and rachises have short, stiff hairs the first division
branch ends, which with a gap after the first division, then leaflets appressed toward
covered a on both sides with stiff hairs uppermost that are leaves. Leaflets/divisions mostly incised, in gradually tapered to
long, narrow tip-- especially are often drooping. on the The terminal division is deeply pinnately crowded toward the rachis
point distally, lipped with light-colored claws. Major appressed veins deeply toward depressed the tip. The lobes and plane, teeth very are dark sharp green, and
above.
Inflorescence
compound
MULTI-COMPOUND, BASAL LEAVES FERN-LIKE OR LACY Fruit hairless Cow parsley (except very and (continued) minutely narrowed on the to beaks), a double held beak-like vertical, tip. looking After dying like 2 tubes and drying fused they on the turn long blackish edge, CONFUSING and slightly the wider 2 halves PLANTS: at hang the base together Wild carrot loosely smaller. has by Poison larger, the tip. more hemlock crowded (p. 671) compound has leaves umbels of similar subtended shape but by many is hairless long with bracts, a smooth, and the hollow leaves stem are much coated in bloom, woods, and forest is much edges. taller. An invasive from Europe abundant. that is spreading I rapidly HABITAT: Roadsides, this pastures, has a disjunct open and spotty distribution but is locally very in some USE: areas, Roots plant are remotely carroty but the flavor is greens very strong in spring and can they be are used tough-not as an herb recommended. in soups, cas- FOOD If you eat them do one it would sparingly use parsley. and well-cooked. Shoots can Tender be used as a vegetable raw or cooked after Well the known skin is peeled. among seroles, etc., as relative to the cultivated chervil Anthriscus cerefolium. parts of North COMMENTS: This where is a very it is close native and abundant, this species is rapidly increasing stems are in some distinctive. WARN- America. foragers in The England leaves resemble those of poison hemlock-but the ridged, hairy ING: The juice is probably phototoxic. (See p. 23.) 10 Erect hedge parsley 1 Torilis japonica Apiaceae (Carrot family) QUICK CHECK: Knee to thigh-high carrot-like plant with leaves and stems roughened by stiff hairs; flowers white, clusters small, fruits stick-tights. ID difficulty 3. DESCRIPTION: Winter annual. Rosette leaves few, 2-6" (5-15 cm) long, twice pinnately compound and once deeply pinnately lobed; these leaves wither by flowering. Stem erect, jointed, strongly zigzag when young, lanky at maturity, 2-4.5' (60-140 cm) tall and 6-14 mm thick, solid, round with numerous fine ridges, these becoming narrower but more prominent on the upper stem. Stems are covered with short, stiff hairs appressed toward Composite range the base in the lower part. Branches large and often several at or near the base, fewer of T. arvensis and the above, base strongly ascending. The upper internodes are long and naked. Stem leaves T. japonica. inrolled, are much larger than rosette leaves, to 12" (30 cm) long. They have sheaths near channeled. very Petioles thin and transparent be near the edge, gradually transforming into a petiole up that to is 0.8" solid (2 cm) wide the rachis branches are may as long as the blade but get shorter going up the stem. After and deeply the tip. Blade triangular channeled in outline less deeply. Petioles and rachises have short, stiff hairs the first division branch ends, which with a gap after the first division, then leaflets appressed toward covered a on both sides with stiff hairs uppermost that are leaves. Leaflets/divisions mostly incised, in gradually tapered to long, narrow tip-- especially are often drooping. on the The terminal division is deeply pinnately crowded toward the rachis point distally, lipped with light-colored claws. Major appressed veins deeply toward depressed the tip. The lobes and plane, teeth very are dark sharp green, and above. Inflorescence compound 