MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR LACY
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
umbels (20 cm) about long. Umbellets 1.2" (3 cm) across with 5-10 rays, at the end of a peduncle that
several pointed, linear 6-8 mm across, densely packed with 5-10 flowers, may ha vary short or up to 8"
against them. Flowers bracts under the umbels and umbellets, shorter than sometimes the unequal There are
inward. Stamens (early to mid summer) tiny with 5 white petals, notched at the tip rays and usually pressed
spread widely; the tiny anthers of newly opened flowers are purplish. out Fruit not folded an or curled
acktight bunched schizocarp 2-4 mm long, the spines leaning toward the tip and curved slightly but not hooked: shaped these
are together into a head-like mass when ripe.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Wild carrot Daucus carota also has sticktight fruits, but is a much larger plant with
sparser, softer, erect hairs. Poison hemlock (p. 671) is hairless and much taller; it has a hollow stalk and is
covered in white powder.
HABITAT: Forest openings and edges, paths. roadsides
forests of moderate shade; on rich soils. introduced and
highly invasive. 1
FOOD USE: Tender young stems, after peeling. can be
eaten raw or cooked. Youngest greens can be choosed
like parsley or chervil, but are best when softened by
cooking.
COMMENTS: The flavor is okay, but the stems are first
too small and then too rough. This plant has been so
consistently confused with another introduced Kedge
parsley, Torilis arvensis, even by professionals, that very
little written about its distribution is reliable. Both spe-
cies are edible and very similar. T. arvensis has only 1-2
bracts under the great umbel, and the rays are often
much longer. Another introduced species, T. nodosa. is
common in the South but I have not tried it.
MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR LACY LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, umbels (20 cm) about long. Umbellets 1.2" (3 cm) across with 5-10 rays, at the end of a peduncle that several pointed, linear 6-8 mm across, densely packed with 5-10 flowers, may ha vary short or up to 8" against them. Flowers bracts under the umbels and umbellets, shorter than sometimes the unequal There are inward. Stamens (early to mid summer) tiny with 5 white petals, notched at the tip rays and usually pressed spread widely; the tiny anthers of newly opened flowers are purplish. out Fruit not folded an or curled acktight bunched schizocarp 2-4 mm long, the spines leaning toward the tip and curved slightly but not hooked: shaped these are together into a head-like mass when ripe. CONFUSING PLANTS: Wild carrot Daucus carota also has sticktight fruits, but is a much larger plant with sparser, softer, erect hairs. Poison hemlock (p. 671) is hairless and much taller; it has a hollow stalk and is covered in white powder. HABITAT: Forest openings and edges, paths. roadsides forests of moderate shade; on rich soils. introduced and highly invasive. 1 FOOD USE: Tender young stems, after peeling. can be eaten raw or cooked. Youngest greens can be choosed like parsley or chervil, but are best when softened by cooking. COMMENTS: The flavor is okay, but the stems are first too small and then too rough. This plant has been so consistently confused with another introduced Kedge parsley, Torilis arvensis, even by professionals, that very little written about its distribution is reliable. Both spe- cies are edible and very similar. T. arvensis has only 1-2 bracts under the great umbel, and the rays are often much longer. Another introduced species, T. nodosa. is common in the South but I have not tried it. 