0
1cm
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR LACY
on folded outer inward, flowers or they (largest may petals have an may erratic be 10 times larger than the smallest). Large outer ontals are
and creased. There is usually a small crease; those of some smaller central flowers are
maturity the umbel central umbellet of dark brownish-purple flowers, strongly sucied
overed with stiff, hook-tipped curls into a "bird's hairs. nest." Fruit an egg-shaped sticktight schizocarp or a single A such long. Hower densely At
CONFUSING parsley hairless. PLANTS: Southern chervil flowers in spring and has very all umbels.
is stouter are and blooms Hedge parsley is a smaller plant with smaller umbels with shorter. stiffer hairs Caraway and nemlock
taste much earlier. Daucus pusillus is a native relative of the southern states Cowparsley
is coated good. Poison hemlock (p. 671) is hairless and has smooth, hollow stems with purple spots that or streaksut does not
with profuse white bloom and has hollow petioles.
HABITAT: Disturbed soil, from heavy clay to loose sand or gravel, with lots of sun: old hayfields and pastures
empty lots, roadsides, weedy locations. Introduced.
nom
FOOD USE: Dig taproots from fall through early spring on plants with no stalk, wash thoroughly, chop cross
wise, and use cooked like carrots or parsnips. They may be eaten raw but are somewhat stringy. Peeled shoots
should be harvested in late spring while still tender. Young leaves can be chopped fine and used as a seasoning.
COMMENTS: This excellent, widespread edible is the same species as the cultivated carrot, but the root
is tougher and white. The flavor and scent are similar-but wild carrot is stronger. The stalks are less well
known but may actually be the better vegetable, as they are easier to collect and are typically larger and
more tender. Wild carrot resembles the deadly poison hemlock, but careful observation allows for positive
identification. AKA Queen Anne's lace.
0 1cm BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR LACY on folded outer inward, flowers or they (largest may petals have an may erratic be 10 times larger than the smallest). Large outer ontals are and creased. There is usually a small crease; those of some smaller central flowers are maturity the umbel central umbellet of dark brownish-purple flowers, strongly sucied overed with stiff, hook-tipped curls into a "bird's hairs. nest." Fruit an egg-shaped sticktight schizocarp or a single A such long. Hower densely At CONFUSING parsley hairless. PLANTS: Southern chervil flowers in spring and has very all umbels. is stouter are and blooms Hedge parsley is a smaller plant with smaller umbels with shorter. stiffer hairs Caraway and nemlock taste much earlier. Daucus pusillus is a native relative of the southern states Cowparsley is coated good. Poison hemlock (p. 671) is hairless and has smooth, hollow stems with purple spots that or streaksut does not with profuse white bloom and has hollow petioles. HABITAT: Disturbed soil, from heavy clay to loose sand or gravel, with lots of sun: old hayfields and pastures empty lots, roadsides, weedy locations. Introduced. nom FOOD USE: Dig taproots from fall through early spring on plants with no stalk, wash thoroughly, chop cross wise, and use cooked like carrots or parsnips. They may be eaten raw but are somewhat stringy. Peeled shoots should be harvested in late spring while still tender. Young leaves can be chopped fine and used as a seasoning. COMMENTS: This excellent, widespread edible is the same species as the cultivated carrot, but the root is tougher and white. The flavor and scent are similar-but wild carrot is stronger. The stalks are less well known but may actually be the better vegetable, as they are easier to collect and are typically larger and more tender. Wild carrot resembles the deadly poison hemlock, but careful observation allows for positive identification. AKA Queen Anne's lace. 