BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR LACY
Wild carrot
2
3
1
NG-351
Daucus carota Apiaceae (Carrot family)
CHECK: Leaves ; 4 times ompound; whole plant with erect difficulty hairs; a dark 3. purple
flower QUICK " the center of a large, dense umbel of many white ones. ID
Biennial, leafy parts with a carroty scent. Taproots thick, strongly scent tapered, when
DESCRIPTION: branched, white inside and outside, with a potent, pleasant, carroty much longer
broken. rarely Rosette with 9-12 leaves, the leafy portion 6-16" (15-40 cm) long, divided).
than twice pinnately compound and once deeply pinnately lobed (nearly sessile. The
first wide, division is usually stalked; the second division is almost always the lobes Secondary are linear veins and
The claw tip. Blades have scattered, long, straight hairs leaning toward often tip. folded, and
pointed and veinlets with are a flat above and flat to faintly protruding below. Leaf divisions are ruffled, not hollow out
of Petioles to 12" (30 cm) long with a hairy-margined whitish sheath at the base, narrow, the
plane. inflated, broadly U-channeled with a winged margin; the channel becomes narrower in rachis, but all
rachis or branches remain channeled. Stems 3-6' (1-2m) tall, usually single but sometimes branched at the base,
round, solid, jointed, with fine and usually lined vertical ridges, the surface green to reddish with scattered
to dense erect hairs. Branches few and strongly ascending, the form taller than wide. Stem leaves alternate,
decreasing in size and frequency toward the top, the leaf divisions fewer, more linear, and more widely spaced.
Sheaths long, thick, tapered, green with white papery margins-although it is hard to say where the sheath
turns to a channeled petiole. Uppermost leaves have short sheaths and begin dividing immediately thereafter.
Inflorescence few to several flat-topped compound umbels 2.5-6" (6-15 cm) across at the top of very long,
finely ridged, erect peduncles to 16" (40 cm) long. Great umbel has 30-90 ridged rays. Beneath is a whorl of 9-14
bracts up to 3" (8 cm) long, these pinnately lobed, the lobes paired, linear, widely spaced, and sharp-tipped, the
edges of the proximal part with a wide, white, papery wing. Umbellets 0.3-0.6" (8-15 mm) across, crowded,
mostly touching, subtended by a smaller but similar whorl of bracts, the flowers within them crammed together.
Flowers (late spring in the Deep South to mid summer in the North) 2-4 mm across, unequal in size (those in
the umbellet center smaller), with 5 white petals. Petals equal in size on central flowers but extremely unequal
474
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR LACY Wild carrot 2 3 1 NG-351 Daucus carota Apiaceae (Carrot family) CHECK: Leaves ; 4 times ompound; whole plant with erect difficulty hairs; a dark 3. purple flower QUICK " the center of a large, dense umbel of many white ones. ID Biennial, leafy parts with a carroty scent. Taproots thick, strongly scent tapered, when DESCRIPTION: branched, white inside and outside, with a potent, pleasant, carroty much longer broken. rarely Rosette with 9-12 leaves, the leafy portion 6-16" (15-40 cm) long, divided). than twice pinnately compound and once deeply pinnately lobed (nearly sessile. The first wide, division is usually stalked; the second division is almost always the lobes Secondary are linear veins and The claw tip. Blades have scattered, long, straight hairs leaning toward often tip. folded, and pointed and veinlets with are a flat above and flat to faintly protruding below. Leaf divisions are ruffled, not hollow out of Petioles to 12" (30 cm) long with a hairy-margined whitish sheath at the base, narrow, the plane. inflated, broadly U-channeled with a winged margin; the channel becomes narrower in rachis, but all rachis or branches remain channeled. Stems 3-6' (1-2m) tall, usually single but sometimes branched at the base, round, solid, jointed, with fine and usually lined vertical ridges, the surface green to reddish with scattered to dense erect hairs. Branches few and strongly ascending, the form taller than wide. Stem leaves alternate, decreasing in size and frequency toward the top, the leaf divisions fewer, more linear, and more widely spaced. Sheaths long, thick, tapered, green with white papery margins-although it is hard to say where the sheath turns to a channeled petiole. Uppermost leaves have short sheaths and begin dividing immediately thereafter. Inflorescence few to several flat-topped compound umbels 2.5-6" (6-15 cm) across at the top of very long, finely ridged, erect peduncles to 16" (40 cm) long. Great umbel has 30-90 ridged rays. Beneath is a whorl of 9-14 bracts up to 3" (8 cm) long, these pinnately lobed, the lobes paired, linear, widely spaced, and sharp-tipped, the edges of the proximal part with a wide, white, papery wing. Umbellets 0.3-0.6" (8-15 mm) across, crowded, mostly touching, subtended by a smaller but similar whorl of bracts, the flowers within them crammed together. Flowers (late spring in the Deep South to mid summer in the North) 2-4 mm across, unequal in size (those in the umbellet center smaller), with 5 white petals. Petals equal in size on central flowers but extremely unequal 474 