BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR LACY
12. Southern wild chervil
2
2
Chaerophyllum tainturieri
Apiaceae
(Carrot
family)
QUICK CHECK: Short, spreading, hairy, carrot-like herb with white flowers in small
compound umbels in spring. ID difficulty 3.
DESCRIPTION: Winter annual, dying back in early summer, often in very crowded colonies
on roadsides or steep banks. Basal leaves in a rosette, triangular in outline, slightly longer
than wide, 2-3 times ternately or pinnately compound, then the final leaflets deeply lobed or
divided. Lobes have rounded to blunt tips with a tiny claw. The blade is sparsely to moderately
hairy Midvein of leaflet is faintly depressed above; other veins flat. Petiole long, solid and hairy, round in cross
section except for a small flat on top lined with a very low green ridge on each side, the base with a broad but
short sheath. Stem 18-30" (45-75 cm) tall and 4-14 mm thick, single, branching unless crowded (sometimes
at the base), purple near the base, green above, with thin darker lines, solid, round, jointed, very hairy. Hairs in
the lower part point toward the base; higher up they are erect. If slender, the stem thickens toward the top of
each internode. Stem leaves alternate, similar but reduced, the petioles short to none with a sheath at the base,
the rachises shallowly channeled. Inflorescence small compound umbels usually lacking a peduncle, with up
to 5 primary rays of unequal length spread-
ing directly from the stem or axil, the longer
about 1" (2.5 cm) in bloom (lengthening in
fruit). Umbellets have 3-10 flowers, closely
packed, on pedicels of differing length, the
ovary elongated and enlarged while the flower
blooms (looking like a thickened pedicel).
Under the umbellet is a symmetrical whorl of
5 ovate bracts 3-5 mm long. Flowers (spring)
2 mm across with 5 obovate, white petals, the
tips often abruptly narrowed to a nipple but
not folded or curved inward like most mem-
bers of the carrot family. Fruit is a narrow
schizocarp, dark purple-brown when ripe,
5 mm long, shaped like 2 cylinders fused at
the side, with a beaked tip.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Wild carrot is much
taller and flowers much later, with larger clus-
ters. Hedge parsley flowers later and has
larger umbellets and stiffer hairs. Poison
hemlock (p. 671) is hairless in all parts, the
leaves with sharper lobes tipped with a white
claw, each lobe with a depressed central vein;
other wise, overwintering seedlings can be
easily confused.
474
BASAL LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, MULTI-COMPOUND, FERN-LIKE OR LACY 12. Southern wild chervil 2 2 Chaerophyllum tainturieri Apiaceae (Carrot family) QUICK CHECK: Short, spreading, hairy, carrot-like herb with white flowers in small compound umbels in spring. ID difficulty 3. DESCRIPTION: Winter annual, dying back in early summer, often in very crowded colonies on roadsides or steep banks. Basal leaves in a rosette, triangular in outline, slightly longer than wide, 2-3 times ternately or pinnately compound, then the final leaflets deeply lobed or divided. Lobes have rounded to blunt tips with a tiny claw. The blade is sparsely to moderately hairy Midvein of leaflet is faintly depressed above; other veins flat. Petiole long, solid and hairy, round in cross section except for a small flat on top lined with a very low green ridge on each side, the base with a broad but short sheath. Stem 18-30" (45-75 cm) tall and 4-14 mm thick, single, branching unless crowded (sometimes at the base), purple near the base, green above, with thin darker lines, solid, round, jointed, very hairy. Hairs in the lower part point toward the base; higher up they are erect. If slender, the stem thickens toward the top of each internode. Stem leaves alternate, similar but reduced, the petioles short to none with a sheath at the base, the rachises shallowly channeled. Inflorescence small compound umbels usually lacking a peduncle, with up to 5 primary rays of unequal length spread- ing directly from the stem or axil, the longer about 1" (2.5 cm) in bloom (lengthening in fruit). Umbellets have 3-10 flowers, closely packed, on pedicels of differing length, the ovary elongated and enlarged while the flower blooms (looking like a thickened pedicel). Under the umbellet is a symmetrical whorl of 5 ovate bracts 3-5 mm long. Flowers (spring) 2 mm across with 5 obovate, white petals, the tips often abruptly narrowed to a nipple but not folded or curved inward like most mem- bers of the carrot family. Fruit is a narrow schizocarp, dark purple-brown when ripe, 5 mm long, shaped like 2 cylinders fused at the side, with a beaked tip. CONFUSING PLANTS: Wild carrot is much taller and flowers much later, with larger clus- ters. Hedge parsley flowers later and has larger umbellets and stiffer hairs. Poison hemlock (p. 671) is hairless in all parts, the leaves with sharper lobes tipped with a white claw, each lobe with a depressed central vein; other wise, overwintering seedlings can be easily confused. 474 