1cm
BASALLEAVESPRESPRENT, LEAVES
FERN-LIKE ALTERNATE, OR LACY
HABITAT: parks, clearings, Full sun disturbed to light shade woods. in Native. disturbed areas with moist soil, especially on sandy soil Fields. madside-
FOOD servation USE: 1. Tender greens and shoots have a pleasant, mild flavor and can be eaten raw or cooked Con-
COMMENTS: out unfortunately, I hate there to call any plant "wild chervil" since the name has been
been totally ignored in foraging is no other literature, common AKA name American applied to chervil, this group. hairy This wild used is chervil. a very for several common different plant that genera: has
Related edible:
13 Spreading chervil
Chaerophyllum procumbens
2
This species is much smaller, typically 4-12" (10-30 cm) tall, with lax stems often resting
on the ground for a few inches before standing weakly erect or spreading. Stems faintly
ridged and not as bulged at nodes, with scattered hair (less than C. tainturieri), sometimes
on only one side of the upper stem. There are usually 2-4 major branches at or near the
base. Leaf sheath margins, petioles, rachises, and blade margins are also sparsely hairy.
Stem leaves are mostly borne close to the base. Inflorescence stalkless compound umbels
with 3 or fewer rays, each terminating in a small umbellet of 3-7 flowers-but sometimes the umbels are not
compound. Petals ovate and cupped but not folded or curled inward. Fruits smaller, less tapered, and less
pointed. As with its larger cousin, the seeds germinate in autumn and form small rosettes with typical com
pound leaves as well as entire, elongated cotyledon leaves that resemble those of Virginia spring beauty This
species inhabits rich soil of river floodplains and valleys, usually growing in shade, and is found further north
than its larger cousin. Although smaller and thus harder to gather in quantity, I prefer its flavor. ID difficulty 3.
CONFUSING PLANTS: These seedlings are edible at a time of year when leafy greens are few, but they very
much resemble the overwintering seedlings of the deadly poison hemlock (p. 671). If you are going to eat them.
examine them carefully for hairs and scent (poison hemlock has a nasty rank smell), as other features are
absent on such small specimens. Seedlings of spreading chervil are often confused with harbinger of spring,
which shares its habitat. However, that plant has hairless leaves and petioles and is dormant in early winter.
Winter seedlings showing cotyledon leaves. 475
1cm BASALLEAVESPRESPRENT, LEAVES FERN-LIKE ALTERNATE, OR LACY HABITAT: parks, clearings, Full sun disturbed to light shade woods. in Native. disturbed areas with moist soil, especially on sandy soil Fields. madside- FOOD servation USE: 1. Tender greens and shoots have a pleasant, mild flavor and can be eaten raw or cooked Con- COMMENTS: out unfortunately, I hate there to call any plant "wild chervil" since the name has been been totally ignored in foraging is no other literature, common AKA name American applied to chervil, this group. hairy This wild used is chervil. a very for several common different plant that genera: has Related edible: 13 Spreading chervil Chaerophyllum procumbens 2 This species is much smaller, typically 4-12" (10-30 cm) tall, with lax stems often resting on the ground for a few inches before standing weakly erect or spreading. Stems faintly ridged and not as bulged at nodes, with scattered hair (less than C. tainturieri), sometimes on only one side of the upper stem. There are usually 2-4 major branches at or near the base. Leaf sheath margins, petioles, rachises, and blade margins are also sparsely hairy. Stem leaves are mostly borne close to the base. Inflorescence stalkless compound umbels with 3 or fewer rays, each terminating in a small umbellet of 3-7 flowers-but sometimes the umbels are not compound. Petals ovate and cupped but not folded or curled inward. Fruits smaller, less tapered, and less pointed. As with its larger cousin, the seeds germinate in autumn and form small rosettes with typical com pound leaves as well as entire, elongated cotyledon leaves that resemble those of Virginia spring beauty This species inhabits rich soil of river floodplains and valleys, usually growing in shade, and is found further north than its larger cousin. Although smaller and thus harder to gather in quantity, I prefer its flavor. ID difficulty 3. CONFUSING PLANTS: These seedlings are edible at a time of year when leafy greens are few, but they very much resemble the overwintering seedlings of the deadly poison hemlock (p. 671). If you are going to eat them. examine them carefully for hairs and scent (poison hemlock has a nasty rank smell), as other features are absent on such small specimens. Seedlings of spreading chervil are often confused with harbinger of spring, which shares its habitat. However, that plant has hairless leaves and petioles and is dormant in early winter. Winter seedlings showing cotyledon leaves. 475 