mm
BASALLEAVI-COMPOUND, LEAVES
FERN-LIKE ALTERNATE, OR LACY
6 Alfilaria
2
Erodium cicutarium Geraniaceae (Geranium family)
QUICK flets; CHECK: one-sided Short, hairy herb with pinnately compound leaves pinnately inhari
umbel with beak-like fruit on a bent stem. ID difficulty and
disappearing DESCRIPTION: Short biennial or winter annual. Basal leaves numerous 3.
longest, often by maturity, to 8" (20 cm) long and 1-1.7" (25-43 mm) wide, the and dense but
Leaflets hugging the ground, pinnately compound with a thick but lowest leaves
hairs sessile, not touching in the proximal part but crowded distally, with not stiff rachis.
often on lobed both sides, borne alternately or in pairs, each one deeply pinnately incised appressed to
again), with the lobe tips pointed. Major veins deeply depressed above and nearly divided (the lobes
tinctly light in color. Rachis solid, not channeled, rounded below and nearly flat above. naked protruding in the lower below, dis-
Stems 8-18" (20-46 cm) tall, 4-6 mm thick, with major spreading branches, weakly erect to leaning, 40%
several per rosette. Stems, petioles, and leaves are all covered with soft, erect hairs. Stem leaves alternate, usually
except where a peduncle attaches-those are paired but unequal in size. There are small divisions near the
base, then a gap where about 20% of the rachis is naked. Stipules short, triangular. Inflorescence a somewhat
one-sided umbel of 2-12 flowers on a straight, erect peduncle 2-6" (5-15 cm) long, bulged at the base. much
narrower than the main stem; pedicels 0.4-0.8" (1-2 long. Flowers 9-11 mm wide with 5 ovate, harry. ridged
sepals and 5 blunt pink-purple petals. Fruit has a straight, needle-like beak 1-1.5" (2.5-4 long, ridged and
twisted, covered with stiff hairs; in fruit the pedicel bends 45-90° to the peduncle, then turns sharply about
130° just before the fruit so that it points vertically.
CONFUSING PLANTS: The specific name of the plant, cicutarium, refers to the leaves' resemblance to hemack-
suggesting a potentially deadly mistake. (Although the
name suggests water hemlock in particular, alfilaria more
closely resembles poison hemlock, p. 671.) However.
all parts of alfilaria are hairy, and the petioles are solid.
HABITAT: Disturbed, often dry and compacted soil
in full sun. Yards, parks, gardens, roadsides, fields.
Introduced.
FOOD USE: Gather tender young leaves in spring or
summer, and sometimes again in fall. Chop into short
sections and use in salads or as a cooked vegetable, or
nibble the whole thing raw. Go for the leaves in the center
of the rosette, as these are younger and less likely to be
in contact with dirt.
COMMENTS: The leaves are more tender than they
look, growing among 50 much coarse, dry vegetation.
The flavor reminds me of bellflower leaves. mild and
faintly fishy. AKA filaree, storksbill.
mm BASALLEAVI-COMPOUND, LEAVES FERN-LIKE ALTERNATE, OR LACY 6 Alfilaria 2 Erodium cicutarium Geraniaceae (Geranium family) QUICK flets; CHECK: one-sided Short, hairy herb with pinnately compound leaves pinnately inhari umbel with beak-like fruit on a bent stem. ID difficulty and disappearing DESCRIPTION: Short biennial or winter annual. Basal leaves numerous 3. longest, often by maturity, to 8" (20 cm) long and 1-1.7" (25-43 mm) wide, the and dense but Leaflets hugging the ground, pinnately compound with a thick but lowest leaves hairs sessile, not touching in the proximal part but crowded distally, with not stiff rachis. often on lobed both sides, borne alternately or in pairs, each one deeply pinnately incised appressed to again), with the lobe tips pointed. Major veins deeply depressed above and nearly divided (the lobes tinctly light in color. Rachis solid, not channeled, rounded below and nearly flat above. naked protruding in the lower below, dis- Stems 8-18" (20-46 cm) tall, 4-6 mm thick, with major spreading branches, weakly erect to leaning, 40% several per rosette. Stems, petioles, and leaves are all covered with soft, erect hairs. Stem leaves alternate, usually except where a peduncle attaches-those are paired but unequal in size. There are small divisions near the base, then a gap where about 20% of the rachis is naked. Stipules short, triangular. Inflorescence a somewhat one-sided umbel of 2-12 flowers on a straight, erect peduncle 2-6" (5-15 cm) long, bulged at the base. much narrower than the main stem; pedicels 0.4-0.8" (1-2 long. Flowers 9-11 mm wide with 5 ovate, harry. ridged sepals and 5 blunt pink-purple petals. Fruit has a straight, needle-like beak 1-1.5" (2.5-4 long, ridged and twisted, covered with stiff hairs; in fruit the pedicel bends 45-90° to the peduncle, then turns sharply about 130° just before the fruit so that it points vertically. CONFUSING PLANTS: The specific name of the plant, cicutarium, refers to the leaves' resemblance to hemack- suggesting a potentially deadly mistake. (Although the name suggests water hemlock in particular, alfilaria more closely resembles poison hemlock, p. 671.) However. all parts of alfilaria are hairy, and the petioles are solid. HABITAT: Disturbed, often dry and compacted soil in full sun. Yards, parks, gardens, roadsides, fields. Introduced. FOOD USE: Gather tender young leaves in spring or summer, and sometimes again in fall. Chop into short sections and use in salads or as a cooked vegetable, or nibble the whole thing raw. Go for the leaves in the center of the rosette, as these are younger and less likely to be in contact with dirt. COMMENTS: The leaves are more tender than they look, growing among 50 much coarse, dry vegetation. The flavor reminds me of bellflower leaves. mild and faintly fishy. AKA filaree, storksbill. 