LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES OR ALTERNATE, LACY
MULTI-COMPOUND, BASAL FERN-LIKE
2
2
14 mustard
Descurainia Western tansy pinnata Brassicaceae 2 (Mustard family) racemes
multi-lobed, fern-like; long, loose difficulty 3-
QUICK CHECK: flowers; Leaves the pinnately pods ascending but not appressed. ID much
with yellow annual. Basal leaves 3-6" (8-15 cm) deeply long, lobed to
DESCRIPTION: Winter pinnately compound, then pinnately clumped woolly
longer than wide, first shallowly channeled, covered with leafy. Ultimate
nearly divided. Rachis a grayish is look), the lower third or so not Basal leaves
Scarce in the
whitish hairs (giving obovate, blunt-tipped, curled and cupped. usually straight and
eastern range.
disappear lobes are linear by flowering. to with Stems short, 12-40" soft hairs, (30-102 usually cm) branching tall, but the branches upper short; ones form may much be
erect, solid, covered Stem leaves at first larger than the basal, then smaller; toward the top of the
taller than wide. immediately at the base. The blades become less hairy a very long, rather
sessile, dividing leaves also drop at maturity, from the bottom up. Inflorescence with only the crowded
plant. Stem spaced, naked terminal raceme, up to 18" (46 cm) long, obovate petals
tip blooming. the base. Fruit an elongated pod slightly thicker toward the end, usually to the
loose but evenly Flowers yellow, sometimes whitish- or rose-tinged, tiny, with 4 angled upward nar-
rowed the at pedicel and often curving slightly. Pedicels slightly ascending or at a right somewhat angle flat-
from rachis, about equal to or longer than the pods. Seeds numerous, tiny, oblong,
tened, light yellowish-brown to reddish-brown.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Poison hemlock (p. 671) has hairless,
hollow petioles and hollow stalks covered with bloom.
HABITAT: Dry, sunny, disturbed soil such as pastures, road-
sides, vacant lots, crop fields, prairie washes, floodplains. Native.
FOOD USE: Young greens and stems can be eaten raw or
cooked, but are strong and should be used sparingly. The dry
seeds can be gathered winnowed, and used to make a mild-
tasting gruei. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: Most mustard seeds are hot, but these are not.
There are many species of tansy mustard, all of which are edible:
Here I am just covering the two most common.
Tansy mustard rosette. I'm not actually cer-
tain which species-they are very similar at
this stage.
Related edible:
15 European tansy mustard Descurainia sophia
2
This is a similar but introduced species, more common as an agricultural and yard weed
than western tansy mustard. The leaves are more divided-the larger ones twice pinnately
compound and
once divided,
The ultimate
lobes are nar-
rower and more
pointed, at
Scarce in the
least on upper
eastern range.
stems. The pods are much longer
and thinner, held almost vertical-
ly, and are much longer than their
pedicels. The seeds are not as mild.
tasting as those of western tan-
sy mustard. The greens from the
upper stem have a very strong fla-
vor and should be used sparingly.
AKA flixweed.
LEAVES PRESENT, LEAVES OR ALTERNATE, LACY MULTI-COMPOUND, BASAL FERN-LIKE 2 2 14 mustard Descurainia Western tansy pinnata Brassicaceae 2 (Mustard family) racemes multi-lobed, fern-like; long, loose difficulty 3- QUICK CHECK: flowers; Leaves the pinnately pods ascending but not appressed. ID much with yellow annual. Basal leaves 3-6" (8-15 cm) deeply long, lobed to DESCRIPTION: Winter pinnately compound, then pinnately clumped woolly longer than wide, first shallowly channeled, covered with leafy. Ultimate nearly divided. Rachis a grayish is look), the lower third or so not Basal leaves Scarce in the whitish hairs (giving obovate, blunt-tipped, curled and cupped. usually straight and eastern range. disappear lobes are linear by flowering. to with Stems short, 12-40" soft hairs, (30-102 usually cm) branching tall, but the branches upper short; ones form may much be erect, solid, covered Stem leaves at first larger than the basal, then smaller; toward the top of the taller than wide. immediately at the base. The blades become less hairy a very long, rather sessile, dividing leaves also drop at maturity, from the bottom up. Inflorescence with only the crowded plant. Stem spaced, naked terminal raceme, up to 18" (46 cm) long, obovate petals tip blooming. the base. Fruit an elongated pod slightly thicker toward the end, usually to the loose but evenly Flowers yellow, sometimes whitish- or rose-tinged, tiny, with 4 angled upward nar- rowed the at pedicel and often curving slightly. Pedicels slightly ascending or at a right somewhat angle flat- from rachis, about equal to or longer than the pods. Seeds numerous, tiny, oblong, tened, light yellowish-brown to reddish-brown. CONFUSING PLANTS: Poison hemlock (p. 671) has hairless, hollow petioles and hollow stalks covered with bloom. HABITAT: Dry, sunny, disturbed soil such as pastures, road- sides, vacant lots, crop fields, prairie washes, floodplains. Native. FOOD USE: Young greens and stems can be eaten raw or cooked, but are strong and should be used sparingly. The dry seeds can be gathered winnowed, and used to make a mild- tasting gruei. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: Most mustard seeds are hot, but these are not. There are many species of tansy mustard, all of which are edible: Here I am just covering the two most common. Tansy mustard rosette. I'm not actually cer- tain which species-they are very similar at this stage. Related edible: 15 European tansy mustard Descurainia sophia 2 This is a similar but introduced species, more common as an agricultural and yard weed than western tansy mustard. The leaves are more divided-the larger ones twice pinnately compound and once divided, The ultimate lobes are nar- rower and more pointed, at Scarce in the least on upper eastern range. stems. The pods are much longer and thinner, held almost vertical- ly, and are much longer than their pedicels. The seeds are not as mild. tasting as those of western tan- sy mustard. The greens from the upper stem have a very strong fla- vor and should be used sparingly. AKA flixweed. 