HERBACEOUS VINES
GROUP 29 HERBACEOUS VINES
I consider a plant a vine if it objects climbs for by wrapping support. Plants itself Herbaceous around that simply other vines lean vegetation produce on other or a
great plants by using fruits. variety of tendrils trail Although of along food to there the grasp types: ground are root many are vegetables, not species toxic placed plants here, seeds, here. most have greens, this can life be shoots, readily form. flowers, Observe identified herbaceous. buds, stems by
carefully, obvious and features, as many and woody few dangerously vines have very long tender tips that can look
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 29
The key is not your final answer!
1. Balloon vine
Leaf twice compound.
or
Leaf once compound.
Leaf with two leaflets.
Stem angles distinctly winged.
2. Everlasting pea
Stipules 5-12 mm wide.
3. Narrow-leaved vetchling
or or
Stipules less than 4 mm wide.
4. Tuber vetchling
Stem angles with wings absent or less than 0.5 mm.
Leaf 3 leaflets.
Vines with 1-1.5 mm thick with long erect hairs; pods brittle, hairy on edges; 3 flat, gray-mottled seeds. 10. 9. Ground Wild bean bean
Vines 2-7 mm thick with short erect hairs: pods stiff. hairless: 3-5 flat, dark seeds.
or
Vines 2-3 mm thick with hairs pressed toward the base; seeds elongated, plump, straight-sided,
11. Fuzzy bean
blackish, embedded in cottony fuzz.
Leaf with more than 3 leaflets.
Leaflets broadly elliptic to ovate, often more than 1.4" (3.5 cm) long.
12. Hopniss
Vine without tendrils.
Vine with tendrils.
Corolla pale creamy to white.
5. Pale vetchling
or
or
Corolla pink to purple.
Leaves with 4-6 leaflets; flowers pale pink; stipules toothed.
6. Marsh pea
Leaves with 7-12 leaflets: flowers purple; stipules not toothed.
7. Veiny pea
Leaves with 8-16 leaflets; flowers purple; stipules toothed.
8. Beach pea
Leaflets narrowly elliptic to lanceolate or linear, less than 1.4" long.
Flowers 1 or 2 directly from the leaf axil.
13. Common vetch
Flowers in a one-sided raceme.
Flowers pale creamy to white.
14. Carolina vetch
Flowers purple.
Raceme with 2-9 flowers; leaf veins evident.
15. American vetch
Raceme with 15-40 flowers; leaf veins obscure.
Upturned banner half as long as the straight base of the flower; lower (longest)
calyx lobes almost bristle-like.
16. Hairy vetch
Upturned banner equal to the straight base of the flower; lower (longest)
calyx lobes narrowly triangular.
Leaf simple,
17. Tufted vetch
Leaf entire,
All major veins arise at the base; at least the innermost reconverge at the tip.
Stem 5-20 mm thick, with tendrils; inflorescence an umbel.
or
Stems 1-3 mm thick, without tendrils; inflorescence a spike.
18. Carrion flower
or
Aerial tubers present.
Aerial tubers absent. American wild yam (p. 678).
19. Air potato
Some Stem major veins arise beyond the base, none reconverging at the tip.
Stem with a small sheath at each node; flowers tiny; fruit 3-sided.
Leaf lobed.
lacking sheaths; flowers large, showy; fruit egg-shaped.
20, Black bindweed
478
21. Bigroot morning glery
See key next page.
(Continued on next page.)
HERBACEOUS VINES GROUP 29 HERBACEOUS VINES I consider a plant a vine if it objects climbs for by wrapping support. Plants itself Herbaceous around that simply other vines lean vegetation produce on other or a great plants by using fruits. variety of tendrils trail Although of along food to there the grasp types: ground are root many are vegetables, not species toxic placed plants here, seeds, here. most have greens, this can life be shoots, readily form. flowers, Observe identified herbaceous. buds, stems by carefully, obvious and features, as many and woody few dangerously vines have very long tender tips that can look TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 29 The key is not your final answer! 1. Balloon vine Leaf twice compound. or Leaf once compound. Leaf with two leaflets. Stem angles distinctly winged. 2. Everlasting pea Stipules 5-12 mm wide. 3. Narrow-leaved vetchling or or Stipules less than 4 mm wide. 4. Tuber vetchling Stem angles with wings absent or less than 0.5 mm. Leaf 3 leaflets. Vines with 1-1.5 mm thick with long erect hairs; pods brittle, hairy on edges; 3 flat, gray-mottled seeds. 10. 9. Ground Wild bean bean Vines 2-7 mm thick with short erect hairs: pods stiff. hairless: 3-5 flat, dark seeds. or Vines 2-3 mm thick with hairs pressed toward the base; seeds elongated, plump, straight-sided, 11. Fuzzy bean blackish, embedded in cottony fuzz. Leaf with more than 3 leaflets. Leaflets broadly elliptic to ovate, often more than 1.4" (3.5 cm) long. 12. Hopniss Vine without tendrils. Vine with tendrils. Corolla pale creamy to white. 5. Pale vetchling or or Corolla pink to purple. Leaves with 4-6 leaflets; flowers pale pink; stipules toothed. 6. Marsh pea Leaves with 7-12 leaflets: flowers purple; stipules not toothed. 7. Veiny pea Leaves with 8-16 leaflets; flowers purple; stipules toothed. 8. Beach pea Leaflets narrowly elliptic to lanceolate or linear, less than 1.4" long. Flowers 1 or 2 directly from the leaf axil. 13. Common vetch Flowers in a one-sided raceme. Flowers pale creamy to white. 14. Carolina vetch Flowers purple. Raceme with 2-9 flowers; leaf veins evident. 15. American vetch Raceme with 15-40 flowers; leaf veins obscure. Upturned banner half as long as the straight base of the flower; lower (longest) calyx lobes almost bristle-like. 16. Hairy vetch Upturned banner equal to the straight base of the flower; lower (longest) calyx lobes narrowly triangular. Leaf simple, 17. Tufted vetch Leaf entire, All major veins arise at the base; at least the innermost reconverge at the tip. Stem 5-20 mm thick, with tendrils; inflorescence an umbel. or Stems 1-3 mm thick, without tendrils; inflorescence a spike. 18. Carrion flower or Aerial tubers present. Aerial tubers absent. American wild yam (p. 678). 19. Air potato Some Stem major veins arise beyond the base, none reconverging at the tip. Stem with a small sheath at each node; flowers tiny; fruit 3-sided. Leaf lobed. lacking sheaths; flowers large, showy; fruit egg-shaped. 20, Black bindweed 478 21. Bigroot morning glery See key next page. (Continued on next page.) 