0
(Continued from previous page.)
HERBACEOUS VINES
Leaf lobed.
Leaf margin toothed.
Stem Leaves 10-18 mm thick: leaves 4-10" (10-25 cm) long; lobe tips (if present) obtuse, blunt.
or
usually triangular: gourds spherical, drying straw-yellow.
Stem 3-7 mm thick: leaves 4-6" long, the lobe tips acute and sharp.
Leaves usually lobed; gourds teardrop-shaped, drying whitish gray.
22. Buffalo gourd
or
23. Ozark gourd
Stem with raspy ridges; leal teeth sharp: lacks tendrils.
or
Midvein below halry but not prickly; cone bracts appressed.
Midvein prickly below; cone bracts spread outward. Japanese hops (see Hops).
25. Hops
Stem rounded, soft-hairy; leaf teeth blunt; climbs with tendrils.
Leaf margin not toothed.
26. Maypop
Leaf surface smooth and hairless.
Leaf surface roughened by short, stiff hairs.
27. Yellow passion flower
24. Melonette
1
Balloon vine
1
Cardiospermum halicacabum family Sapindaceae
QUICK CHECK: Vine with twice-compound leaves, the leaflets with pointed lobes and
long teeth; fruit a three-part inflated pod with round bicoiored seeds. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial vine from an elongated rootstock, the stem dividing near the
base into several major branches; each of these with minor branches. Stems thin, tough,
wiry, 4-8' (1.2-2.4 m) long and 2-3 mm thick, minutely grooved, and essentially hairless.
Branches alternate, in a leaf axil with a tendril and/or inflorescence, all three parts borne
on the same side but often one or two of them reflexed to the other side. Leaves 2-4" (5-10 cm) long. usually twice
ternately compound with 9 total leaflets. Leaflets of the second division are sessile. Leaflets longer than wide.
pointed, the terminal leaflet with the tip often greatly elongated, with large pointed lobes and several large
teeth. Blades flat and hairless with the midvein and major veins slightly protruding above and below. Petiole thin,
about 20% of blade length, minutely channeled; rachises are winged. Inflorescence a few-flowered cluster on a
thread-like stem 2-3" (5-8 cm) long, with a pair of small, coiled tendrils just below the cluster. Flowers 6-8 mm
across, with a disorganized, asymmetrical shape. There are 2 elliptic, strongly cupped, light purplish sepals and
4 shorter, broad white petals-plus various other parts. (You'll see what I mean.) Fruit an inflated, balloon-
like capsule with papery skin 0.9-1.2" (23-30 mm) long, with 3 equidistant, thin wing-ridges and 3 grooves on
the outside. The interior has 3 membranous divisions, each bearing a smooth, shiny, spherical seed 4-6 mm in
diameter. The seed is green with a whitish, kidney to crescent shaped "scar" wrapped halfway around it. The
balloons are green to reddish, drying to brown; dry seeds turn nearly
black with a white scar.
HABITAT: Full sun to moderate shade in soils of medium moisture,
especially where disturbed. Forest edges, ditches, thickets, ravines.
floodplain forests. Introduced. I
FOOD USE: Young greens (mostly spring and early summer, but occa-
sionally later) can be eaten raw or cooked.
COMMENTS: A very common invasive weed of the South. this plant has
that are beautiful and unmistakable. The odd flavor of the maples greens
seeds requires getting used to. Interestingly, this plant is related to
0 (Continued from previous page.) HERBACEOUS VINES Leaf lobed. Leaf margin toothed. Stem Leaves 10-18 mm thick: leaves 4-10" (10-25 cm) long; lobe tips (if present) obtuse, blunt. or usually triangular: gourds spherical, drying straw-yellow. Stem 3-7 mm thick: leaves 4-6" long, the lobe tips acute and sharp. Leaves usually lobed; gourds teardrop-shaped, drying whitish gray. 22. Buffalo gourd or 23. Ozark gourd Stem with raspy ridges; leal teeth sharp: lacks tendrils. or Midvein below halry but not prickly; cone bracts appressed. Midvein prickly below; cone bracts spread outward. Japanese hops (see Hops). 25. Hops Stem rounded, soft-hairy; leaf teeth blunt; climbs with tendrils. Leaf margin not toothed. 26. Maypop Leaf surface smooth and hairless. Leaf surface roughened by short, stiff hairs. 27. Yellow passion flower 24. Melonette 1 Balloon vine 1 Cardiospermum halicacabum family Sapindaceae QUICK CHECK: Vine with twice-compound leaves, the leaflets with pointed lobes and long teeth; fruit a three-part inflated pod with round bicoiored seeds. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial vine from an elongated rootstock, the stem dividing near the base into several major branches; each of these with minor branches. Stems thin, tough, wiry, 4-8' (1.2-2.4 m) long and 2-3 mm thick, minutely grooved, and essentially hairless. Branches alternate, in a leaf axil with a tendril and/or inflorescence, all three parts borne on the same side but often one or two of them reflexed to the other side. Leaves 2-4" (5-10 cm) long. usually twice ternately compound with 9 total leaflets. Leaflets of the second division are sessile. Leaflets longer than wide. pointed, the terminal leaflet with the tip often greatly elongated, with large pointed lobes and several large teeth. Blades flat and hairless with the midvein and major veins slightly protruding above and below. Petiole thin, about 20% of blade length, minutely channeled; rachises are winged. Inflorescence a few-flowered cluster on a thread-like stem 2-3" (5-8 cm) long, with a pair of small, coiled tendrils just below the cluster. Flowers 6-8 mm across, with a disorganized, asymmetrical shape. There are 2 elliptic, strongly cupped, light purplish sepals and 4 shorter, broad white petals-plus various other parts. (You'll see what I mean.) Fruit an inflated, balloon- like capsule with papery skin 0.9-1.2" (23-30 mm) long, with 3 equidistant, thin wing-ridges and 3 grooves on the outside. The interior has 3 membranous divisions, each bearing a smooth, shiny, spherical seed 4-6 mm in diameter. The seed is green with a whitish, kidney to crescent shaped "scar" wrapped halfway around it. The balloons are green to reddish, drying to brown; dry seeds turn nearly black with a white scar. HABITAT: Full sun to moderate shade in soils of medium moisture, especially where disturbed. Forest edges, ditches, thickets, ravines. floodplain forests. Introduced. I FOOD USE: Young greens (mostly spring and early summer, but occa- sionally later) can be eaten raw or cooked. COMMENTS: A very common invasive weed of the South. this plant has that are beautiful and unmistakable. The odd flavor of the maples greens seeds requires getting used to. Interestingly, this plant is related to 