HERBACEOUS VINES
Related edible:
3
Narrow-leaved vetchling + Lathyrus sylvestris
2
It
2
3
2
This introduced plant is very similar, but everything about it is more slender Stems thin
ner with wings less than 3 mm wide. Branches several but mostly short. Leaflets almost
ssile, long-elliptic to almost linear with a bristle-tip. The midvein is depressed above ano
protruding below-as are the 2 prominent basal veins on each side near the margin. Verilets
are raised above. Stipules less than 4 mm wide. Inflorescence a much smaller raceme of
about 6 flowers on a straight, stiff, angled peduncie 4-9" (10-23 cm) long. Flowers smaller,
0.7" (18 mm) wide, the wings much darker than the banner and the keel pale. Pods nearly
straight, about 2.5" (6.5 cm) long, with about 8 tightly packed, uniformly pea-green seeds ; mm .Γ. diameter
when fresh. This species likes sunny to lightly shaded disturbed ground, similar to everlasting pea, but perhaps
tolerating drier conditions. It has similar food uses and is almost as good. ID difficulty 2.
HERBACEOUS VINES Related edible: 3 Narrow-leaved vetchling + Lathyrus sylvestris 2 It 2 3 2 This introduced plant is very similar, but everything about it is more slender Stems thin ner with wings less than 3 mm wide. Branches several but mostly short. Leaflets almost ssile, long-elliptic to almost linear with a bristle-tip. The midvein is depressed above ano protruding below-as are the 2 prominent basal veins on each side near the margin. Verilets are raised above. Stipules less than 4 mm wide. Inflorescence a much smaller raceme of about 6 flowers on a straight, stiff, angled peduncie 4-9" (10-23 cm) long. Flowers smaller, 0.7" (18 mm) wide, the wings much darker than the banner and the keel pale. Pods nearly straight, about 2.5" (6.5 cm) long, with about 8 tightly packed, uniformly pea-green seeds ; mm .Γ. diameter when fresh. This species likes sunny to lightly shaded disturbed ground, similar to everlasting pea, but perhaps tolerating drier conditions. It has similar food uses and is almost as good. ID difficulty 2. 