HERBACEOUS VINES
3
3
3
2
2
2 Everlasting pea
Lathyrus latifolius Fabaceae (Bean family)
CHECK: Pea-like vine with broadly winged stems and petioles, only two leaflets, 1.
and QUICK one tendril per leaf; flowers large, in clusters on long peduncles. ID difficulty
DESCRIPTION: Trailing or climbing perennial, often forming dense clumps or mats, all
parts hairless. Stems 3-7' (1-2 m) long, glaucous, hairless, occasionally branched, ridged
with 2 broad wings 3-5 mm wide. Leaves alternate, tendril-tipped, compound with only
2 leaflets, these overlapping at the base. Tendril large, about twice the leaflet length, branched
ternately and proximally flat. Petioles about equal to a leaflet, very broadly winged. Stipules entire, pointing
forward and back, 0.8-1.5" (2-4 cm) long and 5-12 mm wide. Leaflets ovate to elliptic, sessile, entire, hairless,
flat, angled at the base, angled or rounded at the tip, with a bristle. Midveins and major veins flat above, offset
by light color, protruding below. Two prominent veins from the base run for most of the leaf's length; second
ary veins angle strongly toward the tip and terminate near these prominent veins. Veinlets fine, net-like, fla
above. Inflorescence a raceme of 4-12 from a leaf axil. Peduncle vertical, 6-10" (15-25 cm) long, roundish wit
gentle angles; pedicels 0.6-0.8" (15-20 mm)
(left) The leaflet has a broadly winged petiole and only two leaf-)
long. Flowers about 1" (2.5 cm) long, pink to
lets. (right) Tender shoot.
purple (occasionally almost white), pea-like,
the calyx lobes unequal with sharp, acuminate
tips. The banner is folded up and much wider
than the rest of the flower; the wings overlap.
Pods smooth, pea-like, 2-4" (5-10 cm) long
with 10-15 seeds.
HABITAT: Rich, moist, disturbed soil in full
sun to moderate shade. Found occasionally
along roadsides and forest edges, in parks,
old homesteads, etc. Introduced.
FOOD USE: All young, tender parts are edible
raw or cooked: shoots and greens from spring
through mid summer; flowers later. Young
pods are a bit tough but the flavor is good.
Plump green seeds are excellent eaten like
green peas. Mature seeds should be cooked-
after drying they will take very long cooking.
COMMENTS: Planted mostly as an orna-
mental, this plant sometimes escapes and
thrives, especially in coastal areas with cool
excellent food for a long season.
summers. If you find a patch it will provide
HERBACEOUS VINES 3 3 3 2 2 2 Everlasting pea Lathyrus latifolius Fabaceae (Bean family) CHECK: Pea-like vine with broadly winged stems and petioles, only two leaflets, 1. and QUICK one tendril per leaf; flowers large, in clusters on long peduncles. ID difficulty DESCRIPTION: Trailing or climbing perennial, often forming dense clumps or mats, all parts hairless. Stems 3-7' (1-2 m) long, glaucous, hairless, occasionally branched, ridged with 2 broad wings 3-5 mm wide. Leaves alternate, tendril-tipped, compound with only 2 leaflets, these overlapping at the base. Tendril large, about twice the leaflet length, branched ternately and proximally flat. Petioles about equal to a leaflet, very broadly winged. Stipules entire, pointing forward and back, 0.8-1.5" (2-4 cm) long and 5-12 mm wide. Leaflets ovate to elliptic, sessile, entire, hairless, flat, angled at the base, angled or rounded at the tip, with a bristle. Midveins and major veins flat above, offset by light color, protruding below. Two prominent veins from the base run for most of the leaf's length; second ary veins angle strongly toward the tip and terminate near these prominent veins. Veinlets fine, net-like, fla above. Inflorescence a raceme of 4-12 from a leaf axil. Peduncle vertical, 6-10" (15-25 cm) long, roundish wit gentle angles; pedicels 0.6-0.8" (15-20 mm) (left) The leaflet has a broadly winged petiole and only two leaf-) long. Flowers about 1" (2.5 cm) long, pink to lets. (right) Tender shoot. purple (occasionally almost white), pea-like, the calyx lobes unequal with sharp, acuminate tips. The banner is folded up and much wider than the rest of the flower; the wings overlap. Pods smooth, pea-like, 2-4" (5-10 cm) long with 10-15 seeds. HABITAT: Rich, moist, disturbed soil in full sun to moderate shade. Found occasionally along roadsides and forest edges, in parks, old homesteads, etc. Introduced. FOOD USE: All young, tender parts are edible raw or cooked: shoots and greens from spring through mid summer; flowers later. Young pods are a bit tough but the flavor is good. Plump green seeds are excellent eaten like green peas. Mature seeds should be cooked- after drying they will take very long cooking. COMMENTS: Planted mostly as an orna- mental, this plant sometimes escapes and thrives, especially in coastal areas with cool excellent food for a long season. summers. If you find a patch it will provide 