HERBACEOUS VINES
5
Pale vetchling
3
3
2
Lathyrus ochroleucus
2
Fabaceae
(Bean
family)
QUICK aflets, CHECK: terminal Short, semi-erect vine with pinnately compound leaves, many
tendrils, and clusters of creamy, pea-like Howers. ID difficulty blunt 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Stems usually 1-3, semi-erect to bushy or
usually branched, 9-30" (23-75 cm) long and 2-3 mm thick, rigid for a slightly vine, climbing,
slightly twisted, with 3-4 unequal angles, each topped with a thin line; 2 of the angles zigzag and
firm, short wing-like ridges. In cross section there is a small pinhole hollow. The surface have
is green or purplish and hairless. Leaves alternate, pinnately compound with 4-9 leaflets. The end a
branching tendril, occasionally paired with a leaflet. Petiole/rachis not channeled, often flexed at the leaflet nas
junctures, not bearing leaflets at its base. Stipules butterfly-like, 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) long. the fore lobe
pointed and entire, the back lobe blunter with a few broad, shallow teeth near the base. Petiolules extremely
short, light-colored, upturned. Leaflets egg-shaped, 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long, entire, flat, broadly angled at the
base. The tips are blunt with a tiny downcurved claw. The blades are smooth and hairless on both sides. pale
below, appearing glaucous but with little to no bloom. Veins above are strongly offset by light color, but none are
depressed. Inflorescence a one-sided axillary raceme of 4-9 pea-like flowers, each on a pedicel about 25% of
their length. Flowers 0.6-0.8" (15-20 mm) long, creamy white, boot-shaped, becoming dull yellow with age.
The banner is deeply creased in the center, sharply reflexed at bloom. The wings are small and meet over
the keel tip. The calyx is creamy with light green veins and 5 sharp, unequal, lanceolate lobes. Pods 2-2.5"
(5-6.5 cm) long, flattened, relatively broad, green turning dark brown, containing several seeds.
HABITAT: Dry, sandy or rocky, semi-open woods or savannah, mostly with oak or pine. Native. X
FOOD USE: Tender stem tips can be eaten raw or cooked. The flowers, available in late spring and early
summer, make a sweet snack raw, and can be added to salads or cooked dishes. Young pods and ripe seeds
also be eaten cooked (early to late summer). The literature reports roots or tubers eaten from this plant
but all I find are slightly enlarged rhizome tips and tiny tuber-like
nodules on the finer roots-both have good flavor, but are much
too small to bother with.
COMMENTS: The delicious flowers of this widespread plant taste
a bit like those of black locust, but aren't quite as sweet or aromatic.
AKA creamy pea. creamy vetchling.
The large. distinctive butterfly stipule.
HERBACEOUS VINES 5 Pale vetchling 3 3 2 Lathyrus ochroleucus 2 Fabaceae (Bean family) QUICK aflets, CHECK: terminal Short, semi-erect vine with pinnately compound leaves, many tendrils, and clusters of creamy, pea-like Howers. ID difficulty blunt 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Stems usually 1-3, semi-erect to bushy or usually branched, 9-30" (23-75 cm) long and 2-3 mm thick, rigid for a slightly vine, climbing, slightly twisted, with 3-4 unequal angles, each topped with a thin line; 2 of the angles zigzag and firm, short wing-like ridges. In cross section there is a small pinhole hollow. The surface have is green or purplish and hairless. Leaves alternate, pinnately compound with 4-9 leaflets. The end a branching tendril, occasionally paired with a leaflet. Petiole/rachis not channeled, often flexed at the leaflet nas junctures, not bearing leaflets at its base. Stipules butterfly-like, 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) long. the fore lobe pointed and entire, the back lobe blunter with a few broad, shallow teeth near the base. Petiolules extremely short, light-colored, upturned. Leaflets egg-shaped, 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long, entire, flat, broadly angled at the base. The tips are blunt with a tiny downcurved claw. The blades are smooth and hairless on both sides. pale below, appearing glaucous but with little to no bloom. Veins above are strongly offset by light color, but none are depressed. Inflorescence a one-sided axillary raceme of 4-9 pea-like flowers, each on a pedicel about 25% of their length. Flowers 0.6-0.8" (15-20 mm) long, creamy white, boot-shaped, becoming dull yellow with age. The banner is deeply creased in the center, sharply reflexed at bloom. The wings are small and meet over the keel tip. The calyx is creamy with light green veins and 5 sharp, unequal, lanceolate lobes. Pods 2-2.5" (5-6.5 cm) long, flattened, relatively broad, green turning dark brown, containing several seeds. HABITAT: Dry, sandy or rocky, semi-open woods or savannah, mostly with oak or pine. Native. X FOOD USE: Tender stem tips can be eaten raw or cooked. The flowers, available in late spring and early summer, make a sweet snack raw, and can be added to salads or cooked dishes. Young pods and ripe seeds also be eaten cooked (early to late summer). The literature reports roots or tubers eaten from this plant but all I find are slightly enlarged rhizome tips and tiny tuber-like nodules on the finer roots-both have good flavor, but are much too small to bother with. COMMENTS: The delicious flowers of this widespread plant taste a bit like those of black locust, but aren't quite as sweet or aromatic. AKA creamy pea. creamy vetchling. The large. distinctive butterfly stipule. 