HERBACEOUS VINES
Tuber vetchling
3
4
Lathyrus tuberosus
Fabaceae (Bean family)
QUICK CHECK: Tangle-forming vine with thin, 4-angled stems, 2 leaflets and a tendril
per leaf, and bright red-purple flowers. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Small perennial vine forming dense clumps. Tubers 0,7-1.4" (18-36 mm) skin,
roughly egg-shaped, the surface rough with thick, leathery, dark brown-black but brittle
the long, flesh whitish and firm, borne 2-7" (5-18 cm) underground along thin, rough
rhizomes that are not easily traced to the stem. Stems to 40" (1 m) tall and 2 mm thick,
tough, hairless, smooth, thinner at the base than the middle, 4-angled (diamond-shaped),
2 corners sometimes with a tiny wing; often branching profusely. Leaves alternate with only 2 leaflets, usually
drastically folded upward, terminated by a tendril. Tendrils simple or ternately branched. Petioles 25-30% of
leaflet length, flat or broadly channeled above, weakly keeled below, not winged. Stipules lanceolate to linear,
sharp, 4-11 mm long, the fore lobe larger than the back lobe; one right-angle tooth is sometimes present near
the attachment point. Leaflets elliptic to obovate, almost sessile, entire, flat and smooth, hairless, glaucous
(especially below), blunt-tipped with an extending bristle. Leaflets 0.4-1.2" (1-3 cm) long, in two distinct
sizes-those on the main stems are much larger than those on the minor branches. Veins flat on both sides;
secondary veins arching and intersecting. Inflorescence a crowded raceme of 3-6 on a stiff, angled peduncle
2.5-3.5" (6-9 cm) long. Pedicels 4-8 mm, each with a tiny linear bract. Flowers (early to mid summer) bright
red-purple, with a broad, rounded, 2-lobed, creased banner about 0.8" (2 cm) across. The much smaller wings
meet over an upturned keel. The calyx is hairless with 5 sharp lobes. Pod small, hairless, narrow, about 1.2" (3 cm),
holding up to 5 light brown seeds.
HABITAT: Moist, disturbed soil in full
sun. Roadsides, meadows, fields, ditches.
Introduced and sporadic, but often in
great abundance where found.
FOOD USE: The small, hard tubers are
sweet and can be eaten cooked.
COMMENTS: Considered a weed, this
is a forager's treasure: a delicacy that
long ago was collected commercially in
Europe. Maybe I'm just paranoid because
it looks like hopniss, but I'm afraid to eat
it raw. I do not know of any other edible
parts besides the tuber-the flowers
don't taste pleasant like those of other
members of this genus.
HERBACEOUS VINES Tuber vetchling 3 4 Lathyrus tuberosus Fabaceae (Bean family) QUICK CHECK: Tangle-forming vine with thin, 4-angled stems, 2 leaflets and a tendril per leaf, and bright red-purple flowers. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Small perennial vine forming dense clumps. Tubers 0,7-1.4" (18-36 mm) skin, roughly egg-shaped, the surface rough with thick, leathery, dark brown-black but brittle the long, flesh whitish and firm, borne 2-7" (5-18 cm) underground along thin, rough rhizomes that are not easily traced to the stem. Stems to 40" (1 m) tall and 2 mm thick, tough, hairless, smooth, thinner at the base than the middle, 4-angled (diamond-shaped), 2 corners sometimes with a tiny wing; often branching profusely. Leaves alternate with only 2 leaflets, usually drastically folded upward, terminated by a tendril. Tendrils simple or ternately branched. Petioles 25-30% of leaflet length, flat or broadly channeled above, weakly keeled below, not winged. Stipules lanceolate to linear, sharp, 4-11 mm long, the fore lobe larger than the back lobe; one right-angle tooth is sometimes present near the attachment point. Leaflets elliptic to obovate, almost sessile, entire, flat and smooth, hairless, glaucous (especially below), blunt-tipped with an extending bristle. Leaflets 0.4-1.2" (1-3 cm) long, in two distinct sizes-those on the main stems are much larger than those on the minor branches. Veins flat on both sides; secondary veins arching and intersecting. Inflorescence a crowded raceme of 3-6 on a stiff, angled peduncle 2.5-3.5" (6-9 cm) long. Pedicels 4-8 mm, each with a tiny linear bract. Flowers (early to mid summer) bright red-purple, with a broad, rounded, 2-lobed, creased banner about 0.8" (2 cm) across. The much smaller wings meet over an upturned keel. The calyx is hairless with 5 sharp lobes. Pod small, hairless, narrow, about 1.2" (3 cm), holding up to 5 light brown seeds. HABITAT: Moist, disturbed soil in full sun. Roadsides, meadows, fields, ditches. Introduced and sporadic, but often in great abundance where found. FOOD USE: The small, hard tubers are sweet and can be eaten cooked. COMMENTS: Considered a weed, this is a forager's treasure: a delicacy that long ago was collected commercially in Europe. Maybe I'm just paranoid because it looks like hopniss, but I'm afraid to eat it raw. I do not know of any other edible parts besides the tuber-the flowers don't taste pleasant like those of other members of this genus. 