HERBACEOUS VINES
8 Beach pea
1
2
Lathyrus
japonicus
Fabaceae
(Bean
family)
UCK CHECK: leaflets Short beach vine with are hed, pinnately
hairless pods. ID difficulty and 2. tendrils at the end; clusters of showy compound purple Hawars leaves and
DESCRIPTION: branched, Perennial. Stems single or few, to 40" (1m) long and
3-sided, the sprawling to climbing or weakly erect, stout, rigid, tough, strongly 3-5 mm thick, 'ew
surface hairless angles sharp but not winged, often with a faint ridge on each and flat unequally
tendrils at the tips, or with minute hairs, especially on the angles. Leaves alternate, side, the
like the stem, the composed of 6-18 leaflets strongly folded up along the rachis. pinnately Rachis compound with
two first leaflets attached near the base. Stipules clasping with one lobe arched. } angled
backward; the forward lobe is entire and sharp-pointed, the backward lobes usually pointing forward and
1-3 large teeth. Leaflets paired or alternate on the rachis, nearly sessile, 1.2-2.3" (3-6 mm) downcurved with
broadly elliptic, entire, the bases blunt, the tips blunt and occasionally indented with a downturned long, ovate in
The blade is flat and smooth, rather thick, and bloom-coated. Beach peas along the Great Lakes are cormally -law
hairless, while those on the seacoast are often soft-hairy on the pedicels and lower leaf surface. Veins set
off by light color, flat to slightly raised on both sides. Secondary veins several, 45° to the midvein breaking no
before the margins. Inflorescence a crowded raceme of 4-12 hanging mostly to one side at the end of a straight.
finely hairy peduncle 2.5-3.5" (6.5-9 cm) long, the pedicels 5 mm. Calyx smooth, hairless, with dark. often
purple veins and 5 sharp triangular lobes. Corolla 0.5-0.7" (12-18 mm) across, blue-purple, the banner large,
broad, folded back, with darkened veins; wings and keel lighter in color and much smaller. Pods purplish at
first, turning green at full size, then plump like a miniature garden pea pod 2" (5 cm) long, containing several
small roundish peas.
HABITAT: Beaches along the shores of the Great Lakes and oceans. Native.
FOOD USE: Young pods can be eaten raw or cooked. For peas, gather pods when they are full sized but
preferably still soft, moist, and green. At maturity the peas become less sweet, dry out, and turn brown. Cook
and use like domestic peas. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: Beach peas are not as sweet as domestic peas. In times of famine when these peas have been
eaten as the primary source of calories for weeks on end, they have caused a paralysis condition known as
lathyrism. Much is made of this fact in the literature, to the great satisfaction of alarmist anti-foragers. How-
ever, this concern is irrelevant to non-starving people with alternative subsistence options.
485
HERBACEOUS VINES 8 Beach pea 1 2 Lathyrus japonicus Fabaceae (Bean family) UCK CHECK: leaflets Short beach vine with are hed, pinnately hairless pods. ID difficulty and 2. tendrils at the end; clusters of showy compound purple Hawars leaves and DESCRIPTION: branched, Perennial. Stems single or few, to 40" (1m) long and 3-sided, the sprawling to climbing or weakly erect, stout, rigid, tough, strongly 3-5 mm thick, 'ew surface hairless angles sharp but not winged, often with a faint ridge on each and flat unequally tendrils at the tips, or with minute hairs, especially on the angles. Leaves alternate, side, the like the stem, the composed of 6-18 leaflets strongly folded up along the rachis. pinnately Rachis compound with two first leaflets attached near the base. Stipules clasping with one lobe arched. } angled backward; the forward lobe is entire and sharp-pointed, the backward lobes usually pointing forward and 1-3 large teeth. Leaflets paired or alternate on the rachis, nearly sessile, 1.2-2.3" (3-6 mm) downcurved with broadly elliptic, entire, the bases blunt, the tips blunt and occasionally indented with a downturned long, ovate in The blade is flat and smooth, rather thick, and bloom-coated. Beach peas along the Great Lakes are cormally -law hairless, while those on the seacoast are often soft-hairy on the pedicels and lower leaf surface. Veins set off by light color, flat to slightly raised on both sides. Secondary veins several, 45° to the midvein breaking no before the margins. Inflorescence a crowded raceme of 4-12 hanging mostly to one side at the end of a straight. finely hairy peduncle 2.5-3.5" (6.5-9 cm) long, the pedicels 5 mm. Calyx smooth, hairless, with dark. often purple veins and 5 sharp triangular lobes. Corolla 0.5-0.7" (12-18 mm) across, blue-purple, the banner large, broad, folded back, with darkened veins; wings and keel lighter in color and much smaller. Pods purplish at first, turning green at full size, then plump like a miniature garden pea pod 2" (5 cm) long, containing several small roundish peas. HABITAT: Beaches along the shores of the Great Lakes and oceans. Native. FOOD USE: Young pods can be eaten raw or cooked. For peas, gather pods when they are full sized but preferably still soft, moist, and green. At maturity the peas become less sweet, dry out, and turn brown. Cook and use like domestic peas. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: Beach peas are not as sweet as domestic peas. In times of famine when these peas have been eaten as the primary source of calories for weeks on end, they have caused a paralysis condition known as lathyrism. Much is made of this fact in the literature, to the great satisfaction of alarmist anti-foragers. How- ever, this concern is irrelevant to non-starving people with alternative subsistence options. 485 