3/2
11
FH-226
Ground bean
Fabaceae
(Bean
family)
Amphicarpaea bracteata
QUICK CHECK: Very thin hairy stem; leaves with three leaflets and no tendrils forming
dense mats on or just above the ground. ID difficulty 2.
annual that reproduces by aerial seed in full sunlight but Stems in shade thread- acts
DESCRIPTION: replanting An itself in the form of a large, cloned, asexual seed. the surface
like a perennial, to 8' m) long but only 1 mm thick, roundish, with long, fine hairs, twining; lacks
tendrils. before Young producing thinner vining stems. At each node a long, pointed, sheath-like while stipule, the split at the tip,
green plants up to about 14" (36 cm) tall often stand erect, with
like, up or reddish, (2.4 sprawling over the ground or climbing low vegetation by slightly thicker
stems, around the stem. Leaves ternately compound. Side leaflets are nearly sessile, slightly larger
terminal wraps leaflet is often out of plane and has a petiolule 25-30% of its length. Leaflets entire, broadly ovate, flat,
1-2.5" (2.5-6 long, faintly fine-hairy above and more so below. Midvein and secondary veins (of which there
are 2 from the base) are nearly flat above. Petioles 120% of terminal leaflet length, growing from an enlarged,
darkened pedestal. Aerial flowers (summer) pea-like, light pinkish to nearly white, in long-stalked, dense
racemes of 5-13. Aerial pods about 1" (2.5 cm) long, each containing three flattened, mottled, lentil-like seeds
4-5 mm across. Underground seeds plump
(top left) Underground beans. (top right) Aerial beans.
to slightly flattened, 5-14 mm across,
wrapped individually in a thin skin. Rarely
produces single flat seeds with a tough
green skin on the soil surface.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Fuzzy bean and
wild bean are larger with thicker stems; the
leaflets are thicker and tougher and some-
times flared at the base. Neither species
produces underground seeds. Some tick
trefoils (genus Desmodium) are also very
similar, but the stems are thicker, stiffer,
and less hairy, and the pods are constricted
between the seeds.
HABITAT: Well-drained hardwood forests
and floodplains in light to moderate shade,
especially with sandy soil. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather underground beans
by loosening the soil to 2" (5 cm) under a
thick clump of vines (that lack aerial beans)
and picking out the beans. Boil until tender
and use like domestic beans; they have a
distinctly sweet flavor. They can be dried
easily and store indefinitely in that state.
Gather aerial beans from fall into winter,
dry the pods, then rub and winnow, Boil
the seeds for a long time until tender. Con-
servation 2/1,
COMMENTS: This often abundant plant
mice, a very important food source for turkeys, is
beans chipmunks, and other wildlife.
ing the are traditionally collected by raid The
finding com for beans. If had better them,
trading caches where rodents store
beans these caches, I would eat skill
Prover staple-they are the best ground bean
Gaten AKA hug peanut
486
3/2 11 FH-226 Ground bean Fabaceae (Bean family) Amphicarpaea bracteata QUICK CHECK: Very thin hairy stem; leaves with three leaflets and no tendrils forming dense mats on or just above the ground. ID difficulty 2. annual that reproduces by aerial seed in full sunlight but Stems in shade thread- acts DESCRIPTION: replanting An itself in the form of a large, cloned, asexual seed. the surface like a perennial, to 8' m) long but only 1 mm thick, roundish, with long, fine hairs, twining; lacks tendrils. before Young producing thinner vining stems. At each node a long, pointed, sheath-like while stipule, the split at the tip, green plants up to about 14" (36 cm) tall often stand erect, with like, up or reddish, (2.4 sprawling over the ground or climbing low vegetation by slightly thicker stems, around the stem. Leaves ternately compound. Side leaflets are nearly sessile, slightly larger terminal wraps leaflet is often out of plane and has a petiolule 25-30% of its length. Leaflets entire, broadly ovate, flat, 1-2.5" (2.5-6 long, faintly fine-hairy above and more so below. Midvein and secondary veins (of which there are 2 from the base) are nearly flat above. Petioles 120% of terminal leaflet length, growing from an enlarged, darkened pedestal. Aerial flowers (summer) pea-like, light pinkish to nearly white, in long-stalked, dense racemes of 5-13. Aerial pods about 1" (2.5 cm) long, each containing three flattened, mottled, lentil-like seeds 4-5 mm across. Underground seeds plump (top left) Underground beans. (top right) Aerial beans. to slightly flattened, 5-14 mm across, wrapped individually in a thin skin. Rarely produces single flat seeds with a tough green skin on the soil surface. CONFUSING PLANTS: Fuzzy bean and wild bean are larger with thicker stems; the leaflets are thicker and tougher and some- times flared at the base. Neither species produces underground seeds. Some tick trefoils (genus Desmodium) are also very similar, but the stems are thicker, stiffer, and less hairy, and the pods are constricted between the seeds. HABITAT: Well-drained hardwood forests and floodplains in light to moderate shade, especially with sandy soil. Native. FOOD USE: Gather underground beans by loosening the soil to 2" (5 cm) under a thick clump of vines (that lack aerial beans) and picking out the beans. Boil until tender and use like domestic beans; they have a distinctly sweet flavor. They can be dried easily and store indefinitely in that state. Gather aerial beans from fall into winter, dry the pods, then rub and winnow, Boil the seeds for a long time until tender. Con- servation 2/1, COMMENTS: This often abundant plant mice, a very important food source for turkeys, is beans chipmunks, and other wildlife. ing the are traditionally collected by raid The finding com for beans. If had better them, trading caches where rodents store beans these caches, I would eat skill Prover staple-they are the best ground bean Gaten AKA hug peanut 486 