10 Wild bean
HERBACEOUS VINES
2
Phaseolus polystachios Fabaceae (Bean family)
! ESCRIPTION: 3-5 seeds like miniature lima beans. internades, ID
curved, QUICK CHECK: pointed, Thin stiff pods vine with with 3 leaflets, по tendrils, and very long small,
(1.5-11 m) long Perennial from a large tuberous root. Stems difficulty 2.
climbing by twining and 2-7 mm in diameter, rounded, sparsely covered many on older crowns, 5-35'
nately compound with (without tendrils), branching infrequently. Leaves with short, fine hairs,
one is stalked. Petiole 3 leaflets of similar size. Side leaflets are sessile, but alternate. pin-
tips downcurved, about 80% of terminal leaflet length, grooved. the terminal
vein slightly raised entire, above 2-4" and (5-10 cm) long, blades hairless to faintly Leaflets hairy (especially broadly ovate, on pointed, the
turning dark brown after sometimes minutely hairy. Stipules triangular, 3 mm long, margins). but Mid-
long of flowers, maturity; leaflets have similar tiny stipules. Inflorescence sharp not stiff,
4-24 from leaf axils. Flowers light purple (greenish white at the base), a raceme 7-9 mm 1-6" long, (2.5.15 irregular cm)
Hopniss beans on upper left, wild beans
and pea-like with 5 lobes, on very short pedicels. The lower petal
on upper right, fuzzy beans below.
(keel) is spiraled; the wing petals are widely spread, incurved, and
rotated; the upper petal (banner) is strongly cupped. The calyx is
green with maroon speckles; the lobes are very short. Pods hang-
ing, 1.8-3.5" (45-90 mm) long, somewhat flattened, turning light
brown and stiff and inflating slightly when dry, with long, sharp tips
Beans 3-5, flattened and broad, about 0.2" long. shaped like lima
beans; light greenish at first but drying to dark brownish-black
with fine mottling.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Ground bean pods are not stiff or pointed
when dry, the beans are much smaller, and there are only 3 per
pod. The stems of ground bean are thinner, hairier, and less tough.
Fuzzy bean has longer, narrower, plumper pods that dry to blackish:
they are straight and do not hang but are held stiffly.
HABITAT: Rich or sandy soil of floodplains, stream banks, for-
est edges, savannahs, clearings, sunny or
disturbed woods, especially along rock
outcrops or cliffs. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather ripe beans in late
summer or autumn and use like domes-
tic beans. The root is reported edible.
but I have not tried it, and doing so would
be irresponsible under normal circum-
stances, as it would kill a long-lived,
declining, uncommon plant. Conserva-
tion 2.
COMMENTS: This is a close relative of
the cultivated common bean (P. vulgaris)
and lima bean (P. lunatus). Its remains
have been widely found in archeological
sites in our region. Wild bean has suffered
dramatically, first from farmland clear-
ing, then fire suppression, and now the
spraying of roadside herbicides. There
IS another form (variety sinuatus) with
leaves that are bulged at the base and
often two toned-this variety is common
in sunny pine woods of the Deep South and
looks like a different species altogether.
AKA thicket bean, wild kidney bean.
481
10 Wild bean HERBACEOUS VINES 2 Phaseolus polystachios Fabaceae (Bean family) ! ESCRIPTION: 3-5 seeds like miniature lima beans. internades, ID curved, QUICK CHECK: pointed, Thin stiff pods vine with with 3 leaflets, по tendrils, and very long small, (1.5-11 m) long Perennial from a large tuberous root. Stems difficulty 2. climbing by twining and 2-7 mm in diameter, rounded, sparsely covered many on older crowns, 5-35' nately compound with (without tendrils), branching infrequently. Leaves with short, fine hairs, one is stalked. Petiole 3 leaflets of similar size. Side leaflets are sessile, but alternate. pin- tips downcurved, about 80% of terminal leaflet length, grooved. the terminal vein slightly raised entire, above 2-4" and (5-10 cm) long, blades hairless to faintly Leaflets hairy (especially broadly ovate, on pointed, the turning dark brown after sometimes minutely hairy. Stipules triangular, 3 mm long, margins). but Mid- long of flowers, maturity; leaflets have similar tiny stipules. Inflorescence sharp not stiff, 4-24 from leaf axils. Flowers light purple (greenish white at the base), a raceme 7-9 mm 1-6" long, (2.5.15 irregular cm) Hopniss beans on upper left, wild beans and pea-like with 5 lobes, on very short pedicels. The lower petal on upper right, fuzzy beans below. (keel) is spiraled; the wing petals are widely spread, incurved, and rotated; the upper petal (banner) is strongly cupped. The calyx is green with maroon speckles; the lobes are very short. Pods hang- ing, 1.8-3.5" (45-90 mm) long, somewhat flattened, turning light brown and stiff and inflating slightly when dry, with long, sharp tips Beans 3-5, flattened and broad, about 0.2" long. shaped like lima beans; light greenish at first but drying to dark brownish-black with fine mottling. CONFUSING PLANTS: Ground bean pods are not stiff or pointed when dry, the beans are much smaller, and there are only 3 per pod. The stems of ground bean are thinner, hairier, and less tough. Fuzzy bean has longer, narrower, plumper pods that dry to blackish: they are straight and do not hang but are held stiffly. HABITAT: Rich or sandy soil of floodplains, stream banks, for- est edges, savannahs, clearings, sunny or disturbed woods, especially along rock outcrops or cliffs. Native. FOOD USE: Gather ripe beans in late summer or autumn and use like domes- tic beans. The root is reported edible. but I have not tried it, and doing so would be irresponsible under normal circum- stances, as it would kill a long-lived, declining, uncommon plant. Conserva- tion 2. COMMENTS: This is a close relative of the cultivated common bean (P. vulgaris) and lima bean (P. lunatus). Its remains have been widely found in archeological sites in our region. Wild bean has suffered dramatically, first from farmland clear- ing, then fire suppression, and now the spraying of roadside herbicides. There IS another form (variety sinuatus) with leaves that are bulged at the base and often two toned-this variety is common in sunny pine woods of the Deep South and looks like a different species altogether. AKA thicket bean, wild kidney bean. 481 