11 Fuzzy bean
3
2 Fabaceae (Bean family)
Strophostyles helvola
HECK: Vine with no tendrils and straight, or lobed stiffly-held at the base. beans ID in difficulty small clusters, 2.
DESCRIPTION: ripening to black, Annual. 3 leaflets, Stems to 7' (2.1m) long Tendrils and 2-3 absent. mm thick, Leaves rounded, alternate, compound faintly
QUICK with some bulged twisty,
grooved, with leaflets, with hairs the terminal pointing leaflet toward sometimes the base. 0.8-1,8" drastically (2-4.5 out cm) of plane, long, on ovate grooved to diamond- petioles
70-100% 3 of terminal leaflet length. but often Leaflets bulged or lobed laterally at are the small base. Blades stipules are at hairless the base above of the but leaflets. have
scattered, shaped with stiff, entire appressed margins hairs below. Veins flat at above. the end There of a stiff, ridged peduncle 3-5" (8-13 cm) long. Only
Inflorescence a tight cluster of 2-10 sessile flowers in the same cluster with ripe pods. Flowers very pale pink darkened, to light
1-2 bloom at a mm time, across and new with flowers a broad, may flat be banner, 2 small wings, and the Pods keel-from sessile, which single a narrow, or in a radiating
purple, 10-13 toward the center of the banner. dark blackish-
claw-like, usually curled appendage straight, rises cylindrical, 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, green at first, becoming they do not droop
cluster of usually 5 abruptly or fewer, tapered at both ends, with a claw-like point at the tip. rectangular, In clusters 9-11 mm long and
brown at maturity, wide angles. Beans up to 5 per pod, straight and almost where attached, and
1/3 but as are wide, held rigidly packed at tightly end to end, green mottled with dark purple, with a white bar
surrounded by a cottony substance. Upon drying the
pods split open and the halves coil up; the beans
turn nearly black.
HABITAT: Sunny, disturbed soil, especially where
sloped and sandy. Most common in floodplain
openings. Native.
FOOD USE: Young pods can be eaten raw or
cooked like garden beans. When mature in autumn,
the beans inside can be eaten after cooking. They
become very dark, almost black, and the skins are
a bit thick, but the flavor is good. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: These are pretty good beans, and
easy to collect; it makes me happy when I find
a helvola of them. AKA wild bean, trailing bean.
RELATED EDIBLES: Other members of the genus
Strophostyles are presumably also edible, although
smaller. I have also eaten the beans of S. leiosperma.
Leaflets may be bulged or lobed at the base.
488
11 Fuzzy bean 3 2 Fabaceae (Bean family) Strophostyles helvola HECK: Vine with no tendrils and straight, or lobed stiffly-held at the base. beans ID in difficulty small clusters, 2. DESCRIPTION: ripening to black, Annual. 3 leaflets, Stems to 7' (2.1m) long Tendrils and 2-3 absent. mm thick, Leaves rounded, alternate, compound faintly QUICK with some bulged twisty, grooved, with leaflets, with hairs the terminal pointing leaflet toward sometimes the base. 0.8-1,8" drastically (2-4.5 out cm) of plane, long, on ovate grooved to diamond- petioles 70-100% 3 of terminal leaflet length. but often Leaflets bulged or lobed laterally at are the small base. Blades stipules are at hairless the base above of the but leaflets. have scattered, shaped with stiff, entire appressed margins hairs below. Veins flat at above. the end There of a stiff, ridged peduncle 3-5" (8-13 cm) long. Only Inflorescence a tight cluster of 2-10 sessile flowers in the same cluster with ripe pods. Flowers very pale pink darkened, to light 1-2 bloom at a mm time, across and new with flowers a broad, may flat be banner, 2 small wings, and the Pods keel-from sessile, which single a narrow, or in a radiating purple, 10-13 toward the center of the banner. dark blackish- claw-like, usually curled appendage straight, rises cylindrical, 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, green at first, becoming they do not droop cluster of usually 5 abruptly or fewer, tapered at both ends, with a claw-like point at the tip. rectangular, In clusters 9-11 mm long and brown at maturity, wide angles. Beans up to 5 per pod, straight and almost where attached, and 1/3 but as are wide, held rigidly packed at tightly end to end, green mottled with dark purple, with a white bar surrounded by a cottony substance. Upon drying the pods split open and the halves coil up; the beans turn nearly black. HABITAT: Sunny, disturbed soil, especially where sloped and sandy. Most common in floodplain openings. Native. FOOD USE: Young pods can be eaten raw or cooked like garden beans. When mature in autumn, the beans inside can be eaten after cooking. They become very dark, almost black, and the skins are a bit thick, but the flavor is good. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: These are pretty good beans, and easy to collect; it makes me happy when I find a helvola of them. AKA wild bean, trailing bean. RELATED EDIBLES: Other members of the genus Strophostyles are presumably also edible, although smaller. I have also eaten the beans of S. leiosperma. Leaflets may be bulged or lobed at the base. 488 