12
Hopniss
HERBACEOUS VINES
2
2
2
Apios americana
FH-234
Fabaceae
ubers JICK strung CHECK: Thin stem, no tendrils, pinnately family)
(Bean
green. ID difficulty together 2. by a thin rhizome; flowers compound purple brown. leaves hears with miller leafloin when
DESCRIPTION: forming tangled Perennial herbaceous vine to 17' (5 m)
almost wide, mats over shrubs and herbs. Sap milky. Tubers long, often with multiple stems.
roundish, not becoming tapered, rougher and developing knobs when older. Stems brown. smooth with
buds at as first, scattered on long rhizomes like beads on a string, light 1-3" 5-8 cm) long and
Leaves alternate usually with sparse hairs leaning toward the 2-3 mm thick.
3 or 9), ovate to lanceolate, and pinnately rounded compound, on petioles about equal base, to the climbing rachis. without Leaflets tendrits. 7 by Ewining
channel raised above; secondary veins are flat to faintly depressed. 8 cm) long, the surface sparsely
hairy. Midvein at the base, entire, pointed, 1-3" (2.5 (occasionally
rescence on a short, top. The terminal leaflet has a stalk 30-40% of its length; side The leaflets rachis are has 1 narrow. shallow
axils. Flowers dense raceme of about a dozen flowers, borne on 2" (2.5-5 nearly sessile, Inflo-
the walls bean, 2-5" (5-13 cm) long and 8-11 mm wide, round in cross section, the surface Pod mur in like
a garden brownish purple, about 0.6" (15 mm) long, with irregular pea-like form, cm) fragrant. hairy stems from Inaf
drying wrinkly and light brown.
thick and fleshy when the pod is green, hanging on pedicels 5 mm long. Beans glossy 4-6 per and pod. hairless, stout
CONFUSING PLANTS: Ground bean, wild bean, and fuzzy bean are similar but smaller vines with only
3 leaflets; none of them has a chain of underground tubers.
HABITAT: Sandy, rich soil in full to partial sunlight; wet to dry sites. Most common in river floodplains, along
roadsides, near springs, and along lakeshores. Native.
FOOD USE: Dig tubers preferably when the vines are dormant and cook thoroughly. The flavor IS like across
between boiled peanuts and potatoes. The tubers store very well in a refrigerator or root cellar Immature
pods (late summer to autumn) can be cooked like green beans. Mature seeds can be cooked fresh or dried
they look more like peas but taste more
like beans. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: This iconic wild edible is
a traditional food for most Native peo
ple within its extensive range The vines
often grow densely and can produce an
enormous quantity of food. Hopniss was
also widely used by European settlers.
The tubers are relatively high in protein,
and its amino acids complement those
of grass seeds to form a "compiete" pro
tein. AKA groundnut. Traveler deight A
priceana is a larger vine that bears di single,
large, edible tuber. This rare species is
confined to the southern Midwest and
upper South and IS federally prote ted.
WARNING: There IS a high incidence
of serious allergic or intolerance reach
tions to hopniss. Such people experience
diarrhea, nausea, or vemiting 14 hours
after eating it. To reduce the nances of
such adverse reactions, advise follow-
111g the preparation traditions of Native
Americans: always eat hopniss very well
cooked, such as in a stew or not reast. If
you react negatively. do not edi it again
489
12 Hopniss HERBACEOUS VINES 2 2 2 Apios americana FH-234 Fabaceae ubers JICK strung CHECK: Thin stem, no tendrils, pinnately family) (Bean green. ID difficulty together 2. by a thin rhizome; flowers compound purple brown. leaves hears with miller leafloin when DESCRIPTION: forming tangled Perennial herbaceous vine to 17' (5 m) almost wide, mats over shrubs and herbs. Sap milky. Tubers long, often with multiple stems. roundish, not becoming tapered, rougher and developing knobs when older. Stems brown. smooth with buds at as first, scattered on long rhizomes like beads on a string, light 1-3" 5-8 cm) long and Leaves alternate usually with sparse hairs leaning toward the 2-3 mm thick. 3 or 9), ovate to lanceolate, and pinnately rounded compound, on petioles about equal base, to the climbing rachis. without Leaflets tendrits. 7 by Ewining channel raised above; secondary veins are flat to faintly depressed. 8 cm) long, the surface sparsely hairy. Midvein at the base, entire, pointed, 1-3" (2.5 (occasionally rescence on a short, top. The terminal leaflet has a stalk 30-40% of its length; side The leaflets rachis are has 1 narrow. shallow axils. Flowers dense raceme of about a dozen flowers, borne on 2" (2.5-5 nearly sessile, Inflo- the walls bean, 2-5" (5-13 cm) long and 8-11 mm wide, round in cross section, the surface Pod mur in like a garden brownish purple, about 0.6" (15 mm) long, with irregular pea-like form, cm) fragrant. hairy stems from Inaf drying wrinkly and light brown. thick and fleshy when the pod is green, hanging on pedicels 5 mm long. Beans glossy 4-6 per and pod. hairless, stout CONFUSING PLANTS: Ground bean, wild bean, and fuzzy bean are similar but smaller vines with only 3 leaflets; none of them has a chain of underground tubers. HABITAT: Sandy, rich soil in full to partial sunlight; wet to dry sites. Most common in river floodplains, along roadsides, near springs, and along lakeshores. Native. FOOD USE: Dig tubers preferably when the vines are dormant and cook thoroughly. The flavor IS like across between boiled peanuts and potatoes. The tubers store very well in a refrigerator or root cellar Immature pods (late summer to autumn) can be cooked like green beans. Mature seeds can be cooked fresh or dried they look more like peas but taste more like beans. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: This iconic wild edible is a traditional food for most Native peo ple within its extensive range The vines often grow densely and can produce an enormous quantity of food. Hopniss was also widely used by European settlers. The tubers are relatively high in protein, and its amino acids complement those of grass seeds to form a "compiete" pro tein. AKA groundnut. Traveler deight A priceana is a larger vine that bears di single, large, edible tuber. This rare species is confined to the southern Midwest and upper South and IS federally prote ted. WARNING: There IS a high incidence of serious allergic or intolerance reach tions to hopniss. Such people experience diarrhea, nausea, or vemiting 14 hours after eating it. To reduce the nances of such adverse reactions, advise follow- 111g the preparation traditions of Native Americans: always eat hopniss very well cooked, such as in a stew or not reast. If you react negatively. do not edi it again 489 