HERBACEOUS VINES
VETCHES
Vicia
Fabaceae
(Bean
family)
genus Small vines with angled stems; pinnately compound ID difficulty leaves with 2. many small, narrow
QUICK GROUP and a terminal CHECK: tendril; small, narrow flowers on short pedicels.
leaflets DESCRIPTION: Small herbaceous vines, rather stiff and usually somewhat long and self-standing 2-4 thick at first, with
COLLECTIVE bushy later climbing with tendrils. Stems 1-5' (30-150 cm) hairy, usually mm branched.
a small hollow, angled pinnately compound with 8-40 leaflets, the rachis ridged, bearing the base. Petiole
the stems trailing and or ridged (often or roughly squared) but not quite winged, sometimes leaflets near the base,
with a to before or the first leaflet; rachis channeled above and ridged on the sides. long-elliptic
Leaves branching alternate, simple tendril at the end. There are small stipules 2-10 mm long at Leaflets very
to short nearly none linear, 0.4-1.3" (10-33 mm) long, entire, on very short petiolules. Midvein faintly depressed above
and protruding below. Secondary veins are flat to raised above; if visible, they are closely spaced and distinctly
pinnate (not net-veined). Inflorescence variable; all the species covered here have very short pedicels, 3 mm or
less. Flowers (spring to early summer) have tubular pea-like corollas 0.3-1" (8-25 mm) long, much longer than
wide, extending far beyond the calyx. Pods 0.7-2" (18-50 mm) long, pointed, containing 4-14 seeds ranging
from nearly spherical to somewhat flattened.
FOOD USE: For the vetches listed, tender shoots, leafy tips, and flowers can be eaten raw or cooked.
Because all vetch seeds have some antinutrients and toxins, they should only be eaten well-cooked and in
small portions. Pouring off the cooking water after several minutes of boiling and replacing with new water
eliminates most of the toxins.
COMMENTS: Five abundant species are covered here-2 native and 3 introduced. The literature often vaguely
suggests that this is a dangerous group for unspecified reasons. However, many true vetches of the genus
Vicia have a robust history of food use around the world. Like all legumes they should be eaten in moderation.
NOTE: Crown vetch (p. 673) is not a true vetch and should not be eaten.
13 Common vetch
Vicia sativa
2
1
QUICK CHECK: Vetch with one or two bluish flowers or long, dark pods per node.
DESCRIPTION: Annual. Stems angled, faintly soft-hairy. Leaves have 6-14 leaflets and
extended a branching tendril. Leaflets elliptic, 0.6-1.1" (15-28 mm) long, the tips blunt but with
tipped lobes bristle. Secondary veins are visible, 35-45°. Stipules 5-7 mm long with an
a raceme, the and often a dark nectary on the underside. Flowers borne 1-2 per node, 2-3 sharp-
(2.5-5 cm) long, corolla ripening purplish to black, to blue, plump the (nearly calyx with round straight in linear lobes almost as long not in as the tube. Pods 1-2"
cross section), and not hanging but diverging widely, Inside
are 7-12 nearly spherical seeds, 2-3 mm, finely mottled
with dark and light gray to nearly black.
HABITAT: Weedy areas, roadsides, fields. Introduced.
COMMENTS: The cooked seeds have been eaten
thousands is of years in western Asia and Europe. for
vanilla mostly grown livestock feed. The taste has Today a hint of it
AKA blac kpod veich, narrow leaf vetch.
HERBACEOUS VINES VETCHES Vicia Fabaceae (Bean family) genus Small vines with angled stems; pinnately compound ID difficulty leaves with 2. many small, narrow QUICK GROUP and a terminal CHECK: tendril; small, narrow flowers on short pedicels. leaflets DESCRIPTION: Small herbaceous vines, rather stiff and usually somewhat long and self-standing 2-4 thick at first, with COLLECTIVE bushy later climbing with tendrils. Stems 1-5' (30-150 cm) hairy, usually mm branched. a small hollow, angled pinnately compound with 8-40 leaflets, the rachis ridged, bearing the base. Petiole the stems trailing and or ridged (often or roughly squared) but not quite winged, sometimes leaflets near the base, with a to before or the first leaflet; rachis channeled above and ridged on the sides. long-elliptic Leaves branching alternate, simple tendril at the end. There are small stipules 2-10 mm long at Leaflets very to short nearly none linear, 0.4-1.3" (10-33 mm) long, entire, on very short petiolules. Midvein faintly depressed above and protruding below. Secondary veins are flat to raised above; if visible, they are closely spaced and distinctly pinnate (not net-veined). Inflorescence variable; all the species covered here have very short pedicels, 3 mm or less. Flowers (spring to early summer) have tubular pea-like corollas 0.3-1" (8-25 mm) long, much longer than wide, extending far beyond the calyx. Pods 0.7-2" (18-50 mm) long, pointed, containing 4-14 seeds ranging from nearly spherical to somewhat flattened. FOOD USE: For the vetches listed, tender shoots, leafy tips, and flowers can be eaten raw or cooked. Because all vetch seeds have some antinutrients and toxins, they should only be eaten well-cooked and in small portions. Pouring off the cooking water after several minutes of boiling and replacing with new water eliminates most of the toxins. COMMENTS: Five abundant species are covered here-2 native and 3 introduced. The literature often vaguely suggests that this is a dangerous group for unspecified reasons. However, many true vetches of the genus Vicia have a robust history of food use around the world. Like all legumes they should be eaten in moderation. NOTE: Crown vetch (p. 673) is not a true vetch and should not be eaten. 13 Common vetch Vicia sativa 2 1 QUICK CHECK: Vetch with one or two bluish flowers or long, dark pods per node. DESCRIPTION: Annual. Stems angled, faintly soft-hairy. Leaves have 6-14 leaflets and extended a branching tendril. Leaflets elliptic, 0.6-1.1" (15-28 mm) long, the tips blunt but with tipped lobes bristle. Secondary veins are visible, 35-45°. Stipules 5-7 mm long with an a raceme, the and often a dark nectary on the underside. Flowers borne 1-2 per node, 2-3 sharp- (2.5-5 cm) long, corolla ripening purplish to black, to blue, plump the (nearly calyx with round straight in linear lobes almost as long not in as the tube. Pods 1-2" cross section), and not hanging but diverging widely, Inside are 7-12 nearly spherical seeds, 2-3 mm, finely mottled with dark and light gray to nearly black. HABITAT: Weedy areas, roadsides, fields. Introduced. COMMENTS: The cooked seeds have been eaten thousands is of years in western Asia and Europe. for vanilla mostly grown livestock feed. The taste has Today a hint of it AKA blac kpod veich, narrow leaf vetch. 