0
tem
HERBACEOUS VINES
17 Tufted vetch
Vicia cracca
1
2
QUICK CHECK: Upright, bushy vetch with numerous bluish Howers
DESCRIPTION: prominent Perennial. Stems bushy, 3-4' (90-120°C tall, sharply angled
ridges, covered with fine, curvy to nearly appressed hairs. Leaves have with ? 4
leaflets and a branching tendril. Leaflets narrowly elliptic, to 1.3" (33 mm) long. 14-22
with appressed hairs, the tips bristled. There are two major secondary veins from covered the
base, and 5-6 total pairs of secondary veins, at very low angles of 5-10°. Stipules narrow
and pointed, the lower ones with a back lobe. Inflorescence a long, crowded. vertical. one-sided of
15-30 flowers on a long, naked peduncle. Flowers 9-13 mm long, purple blue. the upturned hanner raceme about
the same length as the straight base of the corolla. The wings are not enlarged at the end. The paly? short
with unequal triangular lobes. The pedicel is attached slightly off-center at the end. Pods hairless. ID 013
33 mm) long, ripening to brown and becoming very stiff and slightly flattened, containing 2-7 peanike seeds
these nearly spherical, dark brown-black at maturity.
HABITAT: Sunny ground, mostly roadsides and vacant lots, especially where rocky. introduced
COMMENTS: The ripe seeds can be quickly stripped from the clusters by hand; get them just before may
split open and separate seeds in a colander, then winnow out the husk pieces. AKA bird vetch
493
0 tem HERBACEOUS VINES 17 Tufted vetch Vicia cracca 1 2 QUICK CHECK: Upright, bushy vetch with numerous bluish Howers DESCRIPTION: prominent Perennial. Stems bushy, 3-4' (90-120°C tall, sharply angled ridges, covered with fine, curvy to nearly appressed hairs. Leaves have with ? 4 leaflets and a branching tendril. Leaflets narrowly elliptic, to 1.3" (33 mm) long. 14-22 with appressed hairs, the tips bristled. There are two major secondary veins from covered the base, and 5-6 total pairs of secondary veins, at very low angles of 5-10°. Stipules narrow and pointed, the lower ones with a back lobe. Inflorescence a long, crowded. vertical. one-sided of 15-30 flowers on a long, naked peduncle. Flowers 9-13 mm long, purple blue. the upturned hanner raceme about the same length as the straight base of the corolla. The wings are not enlarged at the end. The paly? short with unequal triangular lobes. The pedicel is attached slightly off-center at the end. Pods hairless. ID 013 33 mm) long, ripening to brown and becoming very stiff and slightly flattened, containing 2-7 peanike seeds these nearly spherical, dark brown-black at maturity. HABITAT: Sunny ground, mostly roadsides and vacant lots, especially where rocky. introduced COMMENTS: The ripe seeds can be quickly stripped from the clusters by hand; get them just before may split open and separate seeds in a colander, then winnow out the husk pieces. AKA bird vetch 493 