HERBACEOUS VINES
15 flowers among the vetches covered collect, here. It pleasant is not well to eat, known com- as
American vetch (continued)
COMMENTS: an edible and is This largely species ignored has in the the largest foraging a robust literature ethnographic despite record being of easy food vetch, to use in many Native traditions.
mon. lis habits extremely are weedy widespread, enough that and you having might think it's invasive. AKA purple
16 Hairy vetch
Vicia villosa
1
2
1
QUICK CHECK: Weedy vetch
of fields and roadsides; large
crowded clusters of purple-
blue flowers in one-sided
racemes.
DESCRIPTION: Annual or
short-lived perennial. Stems 3-5' (90-150 cm)
long, angled, usually covered with long, soft, erect
hairs (although there is a nearly hairless form).
Leaves have 12-22 leaflets and a branched tendril.
Leaflets 0.5-1.2" (13-30 mm) long, narrowly elliptic,
with 3-4 obscure, pinnate, secondary veins per side,
at a narrow angle of 15-20°. Stipules narrow at the
base, ovate to lanceolate, usually entire except for
a single small lobe near the base on one side, the
two stipules unequal. Inflorescence a one-sided
raceme at the end of a long stalk, with 15-40 flow-
ers appearing in early summer. Flowers bluish, the
corolla 0.5-0.7" (13-18 mm) long, the upturned ban-
ner shorter than the straight base of the corolla.
The wings are enlarged at the tip and light in color,
sometimes white. The pedicel is attached on the
side of the flowers just in front of the base. The calyx
has bristle-like lobes, two of which are much longer
and wrap slightly around the tube. Pods flatter and
broader than those of other vetches, with 3-7 seeds.
HABITAT: Full sun and disturbance: roadsides, fie'
margins, meadows. Introduced.
COMMENTS: The tender growing tips are not as
palatable as those of American vetch, but the flowers
the are good raw or cooked. Over a broad region this is
blooming on roadsides in early summer. It looks
most common weedy vetch, a pretty sight when
gated much like tufted vetch, but the flowers are more elon
492
and the pedicels connected more to the side
HERBACEOUS VINES 15 flowers among the vetches covered collect, here. It pleasant is not well to eat, known com- as American vetch (continued) COMMENTS: an edible and is This largely species ignored has in the the largest foraging a robust literature ethnographic despite record being of easy food vetch, to use in many Native traditions. mon. lis habits extremely are weedy widespread, enough that and you having might think it's invasive. AKA purple 16 Hairy vetch Vicia villosa 1 2 1 QUICK CHECK: Weedy vetch of fields and roadsides; large crowded clusters of purple- blue flowers in one-sided racemes. DESCRIPTION: Annual or short-lived perennial. Stems 3-5' (90-150 cm) long, angled, usually covered with long, soft, erect hairs (although there is a nearly hairless form). Leaves have 12-22 leaflets and a branched tendril. Leaflets 0.5-1.2" (13-30 mm) long, narrowly elliptic, with 3-4 obscure, pinnate, secondary veins per side, at a narrow angle of 15-20°. Stipules narrow at the base, ovate to lanceolate, usually entire except for a single small lobe near the base on one side, the two stipules unequal. Inflorescence a one-sided raceme at the end of a long stalk, with 15-40 flow- ers appearing in early summer. Flowers bluish, the corolla 0.5-0.7" (13-18 mm) long, the upturned ban- ner shorter than the straight base of the corolla. The wings are enlarged at the tip and light in color, sometimes white. The pedicel is attached on the side of the flowers just in front of the base. The calyx has bristle-like lobes, two of which are much longer and wrap slightly around the tube. Pods flatter and broader than those of other vetches, with 3-7 seeds. HABITAT: Full sun and disturbance: roadsides, fie' margins, meadows. Introduced. COMMENTS: The tender growing tips are not as palatable as those of American vetch, but the flowers the are good raw or cooked. Over a broad region this is blooming on roadsides in early summer. It looks most common weedy vetch, a pretty sight when gated much like tufted vetch, but the flowers are more elon 492 and the pedicels connected more to the side 