HERBACEOUS VINES
3
1
FH-151
Carrion flower
Smilax
(in
part)
family
Smilacaceae
genus unarmed herbaceous vine, free standing blue at first, berries. with
entire. QUICK alternate CHECK: Thick leaves stemmed, and tendrils; umbels of greenish flowers and dark
ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a rootstock. Stem thick, occasionally to 0.8" (2 cm), with
COLLECTIVE to 13' (4 m) long, roundish to gently angled, the base,
strongly tapering for flat a vine, side, solid, sap slimy, branched sparingly and not purplish-brown near
a shallow groove or and thornless, coated with a light bloom, green to m), straight,
the surface mottled hairless mixture of the two). Shoot very tall, sometimes to 7' (2.1 vegetation for
Composite range
(often a later leaning or falling to the side and grabbing nearby
and freestanding; the then climbing as vines. Shoots have pale sheaths to 1.5" (4 cm) long them; at the higher nodes, the end
support, sheath tops with a tendril on each side and a third tendril or reduced leaf between cm) up typical
leaves of the Larger shoots have ball-like flower bud clusters. Leaves alternate, 2-5" (5-13 long, tough
at maturity, appear. broadly lanceolate or heart-shaped to nearly round, entire, the bases broad and rounded, the tips
abruptly pointed to rounded. Surface hairless above, rather glossy, with
5-7 major veins from the base, these depressed and arching to reconverge
at the tip. The underside may be hairless or hairy (especially on the veins).
Stipules extended. fused, broad and sheath-like, bearing tendrils at their
tips. Petioles 60-90% of blade length. Tendrils unbranched. Inflorescence a
compact, spherical umbel 1-1.5" (2.5-4 across, of 10-90 flowers, on a
long. straight, naked peduncle from a leaf axil. Flowers (late spring) green,
3-8 mm across, with 6 distant tepals; sometimes foul-smelling. Fruit (fall)
in compact rounded clusters, dark blue with bloom, roundish, 4-10 mm,
mealy to pulpy, containing a few seeds.
SPECIES: There are many herbaceous species in the genus Smilax, includ-
ing: herbacea, lasioneura, pulverulenta, pseudochina, ecirrata, and illinoensis.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Greenbriers (p. 193) are thorny and woody. Wild
yams (Dioscorea) have similarly shaped leaves but much thinner stems.
HABITAT: Rich, moist, sandy soil in full to partial sun: river floodplains,
ditches, forest borders, fencerows, lake and pond margins, open wood-
lands, Native.
FOOD USE: Gather the shoots and tender leafy tips in spring and early
summer and eat raw or cooked. Easily overharvested, so collect in mod-
eration. Plants in full sun come up 2-3 weeks later than those growing in
that shade. The roots of S. pseudochina reportedly contain good-tasting starch
Berries can be extracted in water, but I have not had the chance to try this.
Conservation are bland 2/1. but sweet and make a pleasant nibble on a hungry hike.
they COMMENTS: always Similar in flavor and texture to asparagus. No,
vegetables say that, but this time it's true. This is one of really. I know
whorled All of our species taste good. S. ecirrata is erect our best herb shoot with
leaves rather than a vine-- its shoots are quite an small.
HERBACEOUS VINES 3 1 FH-151 Carrion flower Smilax (in part) family Smilacaceae genus unarmed herbaceous vine, free standing blue at first, berries. with entire. QUICK alternate CHECK: Thick leaves stemmed, and tendrils; umbels of greenish flowers and dark ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a rootstock. Stem thick, occasionally to 0.8" (2 cm), with COLLECTIVE to 13' (4 m) long, roundish to gently angled, the base, strongly tapering for flat a vine, side, solid, sap slimy, branched sparingly and not purplish-brown near a shallow groove or and thornless, coated with a light bloom, green to m), straight, the surface mottled hairless mixture of the two). Shoot very tall, sometimes to 7' (2.1 vegetation for Composite range (often a later leaning or falling to the side and grabbing nearby and freestanding; the then climbing as vines. Shoots have pale sheaths to 1.5" (4 cm) long them; at the higher nodes, the end support, sheath tops with a tendril on each side and a third tendril or reduced leaf between cm) up typical leaves of the Larger shoots have ball-like flower bud clusters. Leaves alternate, 2-5" (5-13 long, tough at maturity, appear. broadly lanceolate or heart-shaped to nearly round, entire, the bases broad and rounded, the tips abruptly pointed to rounded. Surface hairless above, rather glossy, with 5-7 major veins from the base, these depressed and arching to reconverge at the tip. The underside may be hairless or hairy (especially on the veins). Stipules extended. fused, broad and sheath-like, bearing tendrils at their tips. Petioles 60-90% of blade length. Tendrils unbranched. Inflorescence a compact, spherical umbel 1-1.5" (2.5-4 across, of 10-90 flowers, on a long. straight, naked peduncle from a leaf axil. Flowers (late spring) green, 3-8 mm across, with 6 distant tepals; sometimes foul-smelling. Fruit (fall) in compact rounded clusters, dark blue with bloom, roundish, 4-10 mm, mealy to pulpy, containing a few seeds. SPECIES: There are many herbaceous species in the genus Smilax, includ- ing: herbacea, lasioneura, pulverulenta, pseudochina, ecirrata, and illinoensis. CONFUSING PLANTS: Greenbriers (p. 193) are thorny and woody. Wild yams (Dioscorea) have similarly shaped leaves but much thinner stems. HABITAT: Rich, moist, sandy soil in full to partial sun: river floodplains, ditches, forest borders, fencerows, lake and pond margins, open wood- lands, Native. FOOD USE: Gather the shoots and tender leafy tips in spring and early summer and eat raw or cooked. Easily overharvested, so collect in mod- eration. Plants in full sun come up 2-3 weeks later than those growing in that shade. The roots of S. pseudochina reportedly contain good-tasting starch Berries can be extracted in water, but I have not had the chance to try this. Conservation are bland 2/1. but sweet and make a pleasant nibble on a hungry hike. they COMMENTS: always Similar in flavor and texture to asparagus. No, vegetables say that, but this time it's true. This is one of really. I know whorled All of our species taste good. S. ecirrata is erect our best herb shoot with leaves rather than a vine-- its shoots are quite an small. 