HERBACEOUS VINES
19 Air potato
2
2
Dioscorea polystachya family Dioscoreaceae
with QUICK parallel CHECK: Thin vine with no tendrils; simple leaves, uniqually broad at
veins; many tiny tubers on the stem. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: is broad and Thin-stemmed perennial herbaceous vine from
season the blunt at the bottom, irregular in shape, not smooth, and an enlarged root that
at the vine grows a new yam and aborts the old one, thus it is often nearly found white Each
base. Stems up to 13' (4 m) long and 2-5 mm thick, often several with a /
each hairless, other, scarcely tapering, twisted, climbing without tendrils by twining, wrapped The surface around is finely
tubers a mix of green and deep purple, the interior of new vines slimy. Stems produce tiny potato-like ridged. solid.
8-12 mm long, attached directly, often in pairs, at leaf axils. These tubers have large wart-uke aerial
and are slimy inside, especially when young; at maturity their skin becomes tough. Leaves may be paired. bumps
alternate, or occasionally in whorls of 3. They are 1-4" (2.5-10 long (those on tightly coiled vine 'ips small
est) with entire margins. Blades hairless, purple at the base, heart-shaped-but the lobes are extended or
bulging and the tip is elongated, needle-pointed, lightened, and often downturned. All major veins (usually 71
emanate from the base-the middle three reconverging at the tip. Veins are depressed above, strongly protrud-
ing below. Petioles 70-85% of blade length, usually at a nearly right angle to the leaf and snarply upturned
from the stem, with an enlarged pedestal at the base, which is twisted, kinked, and shallowly channeled. The main
petiole is shallowly wing-channeled, the wings often purple. Wings enlarge just before the leaf, becoming wavy
and often touching. Inflorescence a small spike. Flowers white, inconspicuous, with a cinnamor-like scent.
Fruit (rarely produced) is a 3-winged pod.
CONFUSING PLANTS: American wild yam (p. 678) leaves normally have 9 major veins from the base and
lack the purple zone, the wavy wing at the top of the petiole, and the elongated leaf tip. They have no tubers,
aerial or underground, and frequently produce fruit. Bigroot morning glory also has similar leaves.
HABITAT: Fencerows, roadsides, floodplains, disturbed forest
edges. I
FOOD USE: The large underground tubers are the more practical
food source; eat them cooked. They contain more food value when
the tops are dormant. Large roots, even cooked, may cause a mild
burning from raphides (p. 22). Aerial tubers may be collected from
midsummer to autumn by shaking the vines over a tarp or wide
container; cook them also.
COMMENTS: This introduced vine is closely related to cultivated
yams (not to sweet potatoes). It has become a troublesome weed in
areas and is available in great quantity. Tender young roots are
delicious. many AKA Chinese yam, cinnamon vine, Dioscorea oppositifolia.
Other invasive edible yams are sometimes found, especially in Florida.
495
HERBACEOUS VINES 19 Air potato 2 2 Dioscorea polystachya family Dioscoreaceae with QUICK parallel CHECK: Thin vine with no tendrils; simple leaves, uniqually broad at veins; many tiny tubers on the stem. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: is broad and Thin-stemmed perennial herbaceous vine from season the blunt at the bottom, irregular in shape, not smooth, and an enlarged root that at the vine grows a new yam and aborts the old one, thus it is often nearly found white Each base. Stems up to 13' (4 m) long and 2-5 mm thick, often several with a / each hairless, other, scarcely tapering, twisted, climbing without tendrils by twining, wrapped The surface around is finely tubers a mix of green and deep purple, the interior of new vines slimy. Stems produce tiny potato-like ridged. solid. 8-12 mm long, attached directly, often in pairs, at leaf axils. These tubers have large wart-uke aerial and are slimy inside, especially when young; at maturity their skin becomes tough. Leaves may be paired. bumps alternate, or occasionally in whorls of 3. They are 1-4" (2.5-10 long (those on tightly coiled vine 'ips small est) with entire margins. Blades hairless, purple at the base, heart-shaped-but the lobes are extended or bulging and the tip is elongated, needle-pointed, lightened, and often downturned. All major veins (usually 71 emanate from the base-the middle three reconverging at the tip. Veins are depressed above, strongly protrud- ing below. Petioles 70-85% of blade length, usually at a nearly right angle to the leaf and snarply upturned from the stem, with an enlarged pedestal at the base, which is twisted, kinked, and shallowly channeled. The main petiole is shallowly wing-channeled, the wings often purple. Wings enlarge just before the leaf, becoming wavy and often touching. Inflorescence a small spike. Flowers white, inconspicuous, with a cinnamor-like scent. Fruit (rarely produced) is a 3-winged pod. CONFUSING PLANTS: American wild yam (p. 678) leaves normally have 9 major veins from the base and lack the purple zone, the wavy wing at the top of the petiole, and the elongated leaf tip. They have no tubers, aerial or underground, and frequently produce fruit. Bigroot morning glory also has similar leaves. HABITAT: Fencerows, roadsides, floodplains, disturbed forest edges. I FOOD USE: The large underground tubers are the more practical food source; eat them cooked. They contain more food value when the tops are dormant. Large roots, even cooked, may cause a mild burning from raphides (p. 22). Aerial tubers may be collected from midsummer to autumn by shaking the vines over a tarp or wide container; cook them also. COMMENTS: This introduced vine is closely related to cultivated yams (not to sweet potatoes). It has become a troublesome weed in areas and is available in great quantity. Tender young roots are delicious. many AKA Chinese yam, cinnamon vine, Dioscorea oppositifolia. Other invasive edible yams are sometimes found, especially in Florida. 495 