gonocede
1cm
HERBACEOUS VINES
21 Bigroot morning glory
Ipomoea pandurata family Convolvulaceae
QUICK lowers CHECK: with Thin vine with entire, heart
purple centers. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: with thick Perennial. Roots elongated and fleshy, risually surved.
branching occasionally (sometimes at the base), trailing along the ground mm this
a rind, becoming very large with age. Stems to 15 (4.5 m) long, smooth skinned
vegetation without tendrils by twining, Stems are roundish, finely grooved or ridged, or climbing hairless low
lower or faintly side hairy of but minutely roughened, maroon or light green. Sapismilky Leaves alternate but
the stem are curved upward SO that all leaves are roughly in plane Blades are I-5' those the
long, rather tough, heart-shaped, with the lobes and tips sometimes elongated The tips are
minutely rounded or blunt, ending abruptly in a downturned tooth, the tip often minutely folded. acuminate The blacks and
pale below with scattered hairs and protruding veins. Margins entire and wavy. (Rarely tlobei 90 nied
has a tooth). There are 5-6 secondary veins crowded near the base of the leaf, and a few more distally not mg in
toward the tip. Major veins are raised in a gentle valley, but minor veins are depressed or have the ed!
between them to give a rippled look. Petioles about 100% of blade length, rounded with 4 small channel
nearly right angle to the blade. Inflorescence: single flowers or smail clusters from leaf axils near order
the peduncle 1.3" (33 cm), curved, and thickening toward the tip. Flowers (mid to late summer) 2-4 ;
wide, white with purple centers, hairless. Corolla forms a broad funnel of 5 fused petals. the funnel
and purplish inside for about 1.2" (3 cm), then abruptly spreading. Each petal has a faint kee down the
and a jagged outer edge. There are 5 narrow triangles where the petals overlap, each with a groove
long edges. There are 5 layered sepals of unequal size, blunt-tipped, bulging at the base, with 'ong tudical
ridges. Fruit an egg-shaped capsule 10-15 mm long containing a few seeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Other members of the genus Ipomoea (morning glories), but none have the wry:
white flowers with purple centers. Air potato has wings on the petiole margin, a distinctly enlarged pedestar
at the petiole's base, and all major veins emanating from the leaf base.
HABITAT: Sunny, well-drained sites such as fields, forest edges, fencerows, roadsides. open woods and
dry meadows. Native.
FOOD USE: Although the roots can grow enormous, you want to dig them from small plants, as 0 der roots
become tough and bitter. You can dig them at any time of year, but they are better when dormant. They are
marginally edible raw, much better cooked (but still not great). Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: This species seems to interest the imagination more than the palate It IS 3 close 13 ve
of the coltivated
sweet potato
and has Tery
arge root out
there stimited
evidence of
use as food The
youngest roots
are fairly sweet
and acceptably
tender but older
roots are terrible
Some other vines
in this genus may
have adiblemots.
but have not
confirmed this
497
gonocede 1cm HERBACEOUS VINES 21 Bigroot morning glory Ipomoea pandurata family Convolvulaceae QUICK lowers CHECK: with Thin vine with entire, heart purple centers. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: with thick Perennial. Roots elongated and fleshy, risually surved. branching occasionally (sometimes at the base), trailing along the ground mm this a rind, becoming very large with age. Stems to 15 (4.5 m) long, smooth skinned vegetation without tendrils by twining, Stems are roundish, finely grooved or ridged, or climbing hairless low lower or faintly side hairy of but minutely roughened, maroon or light green. Sapismilky Leaves alternate but the stem are curved upward SO that all leaves are roughly in plane Blades are I-5' those the long, rather tough, heart-shaped, with the lobes and tips sometimes elongated The tips are minutely rounded or blunt, ending abruptly in a downturned tooth, the tip often minutely folded. acuminate The blacks and pale below with scattered hairs and protruding veins. Margins entire and wavy. (Rarely tlobei 90 nied has a tooth). There are 5-6 secondary veins crowded near the base of the leaf, and a few more distally not mg in toward the tip. Major veins are raised in a gentle valley, but minor veins are depressed or have the ed! between them to give a rippled look. Petioles about 100% of blade length, rounded with 4 small channel nearly right angle to the blade. Inflorescence: single flowers or smail clusters from leaf axils near order the peduncle 1.3" (33 cm), curved, and thickening toward the tip. Flowers (mid to late summer) 2-4 ; wide, white with purple centers, hairless. Corolla forms a broad funnel of 5 fused petals. the funnel and purplish inside for about 1.2" (3 cm), then abruptly spreading. Each petal has a faint kee down the and a jagged outer edge. There are 5 narrow triangles where the petals overlap, each with a groove long edges. There are 5 layered sepals of unequal size, blunt-tipped, bulging at the base, with 'ong tudical ridges. Fruit an egg-shaped capsule 10-15 mm long containing a few seeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: Other members of the genus Ipomoea (morning glories), but none have the wry: white flowers with purple centers. Air potato has wings on the petiole margin, a distinctly enlarged pedestar at the petiole's base, and all major veins emanating from the leaf base. HABITAT: Sunny, well-drained sites such as fields, forest edges, fencerows, roadsides. open woods and dry meadows. Native. FOOD USE: Although the roots can grow enormous, you want to dig them from small plants, as 0 der roots become tough and bitter. You can dig them at any time of year, but they are better when dormant. They are marginally edible raw, much better cooked (but still not great). Conservation 3. COMMENTS: This species seems to interest the imagination more than the palate It IS 3 close 13 ve of the coltivated sweet potato and has Tery arge root out there stimited evidence of use as food The youngest roots are fairly sweet and acceptably tender but older roots are terrible Some other vines in this genus may have adiblemots. but have not confirmed this 497 