HERBACEOUS VINES
20 Black bindweed
1 galls 2
2
(Buckwheat
family)
Fallopia
(in
part)
Polygonaceae
genus berbaceous vines without tendrils; simple entire seeds leaves in papery with
lobed QUICK bases; CHECK: racemes Thin of tiny flowers becoming 3-sided shiny black a
husk. ID difficulty 2.
Thin herbaceous vines to 16' (5 m) long, often forming dense and sometimes tangles or
DESCRIPTION: mm thick, branching occasionally, reddish, slightly rough are long and
mats. Stems 2-3 moderately hairy, the hairs down-curved. Internodes
angled, sparsely absent. Leaves to alternate, simple, entire, thin, heart-shaped to triangular of or inflorescence broadly ovate branches. with an
tendrils base, 1-6" (2.5-15 cm) long. There are often reduced leaves on the base and
Surface arrow-like hairless or sparsely soft-hairy, the underside slightly roughened and often mealy glandular.
Midvein and secondary veins are lightly depressed above. Secondary veins are not concentrated at the base.
Petioles 60-90% of blade length. A small sheath encircles the stem at each node. Inflorescence a raceme 1-3"
(2.5-8 long, the flowers in spaced clumps or whorls of up to 6, each on a very short pedicel. Flowers tiny,
whitish green with 5 tepals. Fruit a 3-sided seed (achene) with a dark-brown to black shell, surrounded by
3 enlarged, leafy scale-like structures (valves) that become dry, brown, and papery when ripe.
SPECIES: F, convolvulus is an introduced annual. The leaf tips are longer and more pointed, and the upper
leaves have arrowhead lobes at the base. The valves are about as long as the seed, and the seed surface is dull
and rough. F. scandens is a native perennial that grows larger than the other species and has strongly angled
stems. The valves are much longer than the ripe seed and have the midvein enlarged into a broad wing. The
seed surface is black and shiny. F. clinodis is a native perennial with smaller seeds and soft-hairy leaves. It can
be distinguished by the fringe of backward-pointing hairs at the nodes. Veins and veinlets are more deeply
depressed and the midvein is often red.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Redvine Brunnichia ovata (edibility unknown) is a related native of the South distin-
guished by its elongated leaves and fruit, and the presence of tendrils.
HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny places, especially with rich, moist soil. Lake shores, river floodplains, steep
banks, fence lines, roadsides, forest edges, disturbed woods, weedy lots.
FOOD USE: Shoots (spring) of the perennial species can be eaten cooked;
they are astringent and sour like dock greens. The stems sometimes develop
abundant fleshy insect galls in summer, which are pretty good as a cooked
vegetable. Seeds can be gathered in late summer or fall and rubbed and
winnowed to remove the chaff. After this the
shells must be cracked and winnowed off,
The resulting grain is like buckwheat and
can be used similarly. (F. clinodis seeds are
inferior.) Conservation 1 (native species).
COMMENTS: The seeds of black bindweed
have been collected since ancient times
in Europe
and have
served as
an impor-
tant food,
even being
cultivated.
AKA climb-
ing false
buckwheat.
4
496
(top
left)
Fallopia
dens upe seeds. (bottom andens right) ripe Fallopia fruit. (top clinadis right) leaves. Fallopia scan-
HERBACEOUS VINES 20 Black bindweed 1 galls 2 2 (Buckwheat family) Fallopia (in part) Polygonaceae genus berbaceous vines without tendrils; simple entire seeds leaves in papery with lobed QUICK bases; CHECK: racemes Thin of tiny flowers becoming 3-sided shiny black a husk. ID difficulty 2. Thin herbaceous vines to 16' (5 m) long, often forming dense and sometimes tangles or DESCRIPTION: mm thick, branching occasionally, reddish, slightly rough are long and mats. Stems 2-3 moderately hairy, the hairs down-curved. Internodes angled, sparsely absent. Leaves to alternate, simple, entire, thin, heart-shaped to triangular of or inflorescence broadly ovate branches. with an tendrils base, 1-6" (2.5-15 cm) long. There are often reduced leaves on the base and Surface arrow-like hairless or sparsely soft-hairy, the underside slightly roughened and often mealy glandular. Midvein and secondary veins are lightly depressed above. Secondary veins are not concentrated at the base. Petioles 60-90% of blade length. A small sheath encircles the stem at each node. Inflorescence a raceme 1-3" (2.5-8 long, the flowers in spaced clumps or whorls of up to 6, each on a very short pedicel. Flowers tiny, whitish green with 5 tepals. Fruit a 3-sided seed (achene) with a dark-brown to black shell, surrounded by 3 enlarged, leafy scale-like structures (valves) that become dry, brown, and papery when ripe. SPECIES: F, convolvulus is an introduced annual. The leaf tips are longer and more pointed, and the upper leaves have arrowhead lobes at the base. The valves are about as long as the seed, and the seed surface is dull and rough. F. scandens is a native perennial that grows larger than the other species and has strongly angled stems. The valves are much longer than the ripe seed and have the midvein enlarged into a broad wing. The seed surface is black and shiny. F. clinodis is a native perennial with smaller seeds and soft-hairy leaves. It can be distinguished by the fringe of backward-pointing hairs at the nodes. Veins and veinlets are more deeply depressed and the midvein is often red. CONFUSING PLANTS: Redvine Brunnichia ovata (edibility unknown) is a related native of the South distin- guished by its elongated leaves and fruit, and the presence of tendrils. HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny places, especially with rich, moist soil. Lake shores, river floodplains, steep banks, fence lines, roadsides, forest edges, disturbed woods, weedy lots. FOOD USE: Shoots (spring) of the perennial species can be eaten cooked; they are astringent and sour like dock greens. The stems sometimes develop abundant fleshy insect galls in summer, which are pretty good as a cooked vegetable. Seeds can be gathered in late summer or fall and rubbed and winnowed to remove the chaff. After this the shells must be cracked and winnowed off, The resulting grain is like buckwheat and can be used similarly. (F. clinodis seeds are inferior.) Conservation 1 (native species). COMMENTS: The seeds of black bindweed have been collected since ancient times in Europe and have served as an impor- tant food, even being cultivated. AKA climb- ing false buckwheat. 4 496 (top left) Fallopia dens upe seeds. (bottom andens right) ripe Fallopia fruit. (top clinadis right) leaves. Fallopia scan- 