elonette 3
HERBACEOUS VINES
elothria pendula Cucurbitaceae (Cucumber family)
smooth HECK: Thin cucumbers vine with before blunt turning tipped black palmate ID difficulty leaver and Frunks danating
oved lengthwise, Perennial, branching widely, Stems B-16' 1.
unbranched smooth and hairless, green. Leaves (2.4 5 m) long and , 1 mm
3.5" (5-9 cm) tendril, the latter coiling very tightly and alternate, ear h with an
green above and long roughened and about equally wide, palmately but lacking shallowly pads lobed at the the tio labe
raised by short, stiff hairs; below Tips Bunt for
eeth. Petioles proximally, about but 60% distally of they become slightly depressed; it IS gray-green below they and protrude less hair Major veins
channel, blade length, as thick or thicker than Margins MAYY
and contrast with female the stem by having raspy hairs. Stipules the absent. adjacent Inflorescence stem: they have nale a small
separate; the male in small clusters from the leaf axils. ine female and
solitary. Flowers tiny, 2.5-4 mm across, yellow, symmetrical, the corolla
joined at the base with 5 spreading, square-tipped lobes, the cary/ with
5 tiny pointed lobes. Fruits broadly elliptic, 0.6-0.9' (15-23 mm) long.
solitary, green with whitish mottling, with 8 faint lines running length
wise. The flesh is partly translucent with cucumber-like seeds opening
to black and soft. WARNING: When ripe the for
strong laxative and should not be eaten.
HABITAT: Forest margins and openings, fence rows brusny areas,
streamside woods. Native.
FOOD USE: The underripe fruit tastes like a cucumber, but in my opinion
better. Fully ripe fruit gets a sour, musky flavor that is disagraeable Use
the fruits as you would cucumbers. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This little-known fruit looks like a miniature watermelon
it is common, easy to harvest, and delicious. A close relative. M. insor.
is native to Mexico and sold in seed catalogs. AKA creeping nucumber
499
elonette 3 HERBACEOUS VINES elothria pendula Cucurbitaceae (Cucumber family) smooth HECK: Thin cucumbers vine with before blunt turning tipped black palmate ID difficulty leaver and Frunks danating oved lengthwise, Perennial, branching widely, Stems B-16' 1. unbranched smooth and hairless, green. Leaves (2.4 5 m) long and , 1 mm 3.5" (5-9 cm) tendril, the latter coiling very tightly and alternate, ear h with an green above and long roughened and about equally wide, palmately but lacking shallowly pads lobed at the the tio labe raised by short, stiff hairs; below Tips Bunt for eeth. Petioles proximally, about but 60% distally of they become slightly depressed; it IS gray-green below they and protrude less hair Major veins channel, blade length, as thick or thicker than Margins MAYY and contrast with female the stem by having raspy hairs. Stipules the absent. adjacent Inflorescence stem: they have nale a small separate; the male in small clusters from the leaf axils. ine female and solitary. Flowers tiny, 2.5-4 mm across, yellow, symmetrical, the corolla joined at the base with 5 spreading, square-tipped lobes, the cary/ with 5 tiny pointed lobes. Fruits broadly elliptic, 0.6-0.9' (15-23 mm) long. solitary, green with whitish mottling, with 8 faint lines running length wise. The flesh is partly translucent with cucumber-like seeds opening to black and soft. WARNING: When ripe the for strong laxative and should not be eaten. HABITAT: Forest margins and openings, fence rows brusny areas, streamside woods. Native. FOOD USE: The underripe fruit tastes like a cucumber, but in my opinion better. Fully ripe fruit gets a sour, musky flavor that is disagraeable Use the fruits as you would cucumbers. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This little-known fruit looks like a miniature watermelon it is common, easy to harvest, and delicious. A close relative. M. insor. is native to Mexico and sold in seed catalogs. AKA creeping nucumber 499 