HERBACEOUS
21
Cucurbita Buffaio gourd foetidissima 1 Cucurbitaceae 2 (Cucumber family)
thick-stemmed vine with raspy leaves difficulty and stems, 1. large squash-
QUICK CHECK: Large, flowers, and smooth, round gourds. ID
like yellow-olange Perennial from an enlarged root. Stems multiple deeply on grooved, large plants, raspy-hairy. trailing
along the ground to 30' (9 m) long cm) and long, thick, densely stiff-hairy on both sides, tapered tips.
DESCRIPTION: 0.7" (18 mm) thick, solid, ruffled,
Rare in the
Leaves alternate, ovate 4-10" with (10-25 heart-shaped bases, sometimes 3 or 5-lobed, above with and strongly
eastern third.
triangular to is gray-green. Veins and veinlets are depressed teeth. Petiole
The underside below. light wavy with tiny, widely spaced, outward-pointing on all sides. Tendril 25% ttached of blade at the length, node.
protrude Margins attached to, raspy, deeply grooved leaf axils, 3-4" (8-10
often thicker than to late the summer) stems they yellow-orange, are normally solitary, on short pedicels from spherical, smooth-skinned
Flowers (mid fused in the lower half, much like squash flowers. Fruit a nearly to dull straw yellow
gourd across 2.5-4" with 5 (6-10 petals cm) in diameter, ripening to a mixture of greenish that and orange fading
when dry. The gooey, partly air-filled insides hold numerous flat seeds
resemble pumpkin seeds in miniature.
HABITAT: Sand or gravel in full sun, at low points where water drains into
coarse soil such as ditches, vacant lots, streambanks, washes, gullies, and
lower hillsides. Native.
FOOD USE: Seeds can be gathered from ripe fruit. They need to be rubbed
and soaked in several changes of water to remove the taint of the bitter
juice, after which can be used like pumpkinseeds
(including pressing for oil). A faint bitterness
always remains. The enormous root is too bit-
ter to eat as a vegetable, but starch for culinary
purposes can supposedly be extracted from it
(I have not done this). Flowers can be eaten like
squash blossoms. Some people report eating the
baby fruit cooked. Conservation 3/1.
COMMENTS: This is closely related to the ances-
tors of domestic squashes, which were grown for
their edible seeds rather than pulp for the first few
thousand years. There have been experiments
with growing buffalo gourd as a starch-root crop,
but growth is slow and the processing costly.
Related edible:
This 23 Ozark gourd Cucurbita pepo variety ozarkana/texana/ovifera
colonizes gourd driftwood is naturally and distributed along river systems in the southern
are deeply lobed, and the flotsam piles; it has spread widely to disturbed habitats. states, where it
be used similarly to buffalo gourds ripen to pale whitish-gray. The seeds and The leaves
but today populations may also gourd. cross This plant is the ancestor of some domestic blossoms can
the billerest substance known-just with taste domestic the tiniest squashes. bit to amaze The flesh yourself. contains squashes, perhaps
HERBACEOUS 21 Cucurbita Buffaio gourd foetidissima 1 Cucurbitaceae 2 (Cucumber family) thick-stemmed vine with raspy leaves difficulty and stems, 1. large squash- QUICK CHECK: Large, flowers, and smooth, round gourds. ID like yellow-olange Perennial from an enlarged root. Stems multiple deeply on grooved, large plants, raspy-hairy. trailing along the ground to 30' (9 m) long cm) and long, thick, densely stiff-hairy on both sides, tapered tips. DESCRIPTION: 0.7" (18 mm) thick, solid, ruffled, Rare in the Leaves alternate, ovate 4-10" with (10-25 heart-shaped bases, sometimes 3 or 5-lobed, above with and strongly eastern third. triangular to is gray-green. Veins and veinlets are depressed teeth. Petiole The underside below. light wavy with tiny, widely spaced, outward-pointing on all sides. Tendril 25% ttached of blade at the length, node. protrude Margins attached to, raspy, deeply grooved leaf axils, 3-4" (8-10 often thicker than to late the summer) stems they yellow-orange, are normally solitary, on short pedicels from spherical, smooth-skinned Flowers (mid fused in the lower half, much like squash flowers. Fruit a nearly to dull straw yellow gourd across 2.5-4" with 5 (6-10 petals cm) in diameter, ripening to a mixture of greenish that and orange fading when dry. The gooey, partly air-filled insides hold numerous flat seeds resemble pumpkin seeds in miniature. HABITAT: Sand or gravel in full sun, at low points where water drains into coarse soil such as ditches, vacant lots, streambanks, washes, gullies, and lower hillsides. Native. FOOD USE: Seeds can be gathered from ripe fruit. They need to be rubbed and soaked in several changes of water to remove the taint of the bitter juice, after which can be used like pumpkinseeds (including pressing for oil). A faint bitterness always remains. The enormous root is too bit- ter to eat as a vegetable, but starch for culinary purposes can supposedly be extracted from it (I have not done this). Flowers can be eaten like squash blossoms. Some people report eating the baby fruit cooked. Conservation 3/1. COMMENTS: This is closely related to the ances- tors of domestic squashes, which were grown for their edible seeds rather than pulp for the first few thousand years. There have been experiments with growing buffalo gourd as a starch-root crop, but growth is slow and the processing costly. Related edible: This 23 Ozark gourd Cucurbita pepo variety ozarkana/texana/ovifera colonizes gourd driftwood is naturally and distributed along river systems in the southern are deeply lobed, and the flotsam piles; it has spread widely to disturbed habitats. states, where it be used similarly to buffalo gourds ripen to pale whitish-gray. The seeds and The leaves but today populations may also gourd. cross This plant is the ancestor of some domestic blossoms can the billerest substance known-just with taste domestic the tiniest squashes. bit to amaze The flesh yourself. contains squashes, perhaps 