soceae (Hemp family
HERBACEOUS VINES
26
Maypop
3
2
2
Passiflora
NG-238
incarnata
family
Passifloraceae
QUICK shaped, CHECK: Herbaceous vine with deeply lobed, small-toothed leaves and
egg-sized, green to yellow fruit. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: when Perennial. Stems 10-25' (3-8 m) long, roundish, slightly
Stipules
young), green, 3-7 mm thick, climbing with long, coiling tendrils. Leaves hairy (more 50
4-5" (10-13 cm) long, deeply 3-lobed, heart-shaped at the base with the rounded alternate,
upturned, the lobe tips acuminate-pointed. Sinuses are rounded. The surface is lobes
hairy above at first, becoming hairless or nearly so; hairless to densely fine-hairy faintly below. Veins and
are depressed above; secondary veins are angled broadly, not forking, arching toward the tip. Margins veinlets
small, blunt teeth oriented toward the tip. Petioles stout, 25-40% of blade length, with a pair of large. breast- have
like glands on the upper side near the blade. There are small thread-like stipules that fall early in the growing
season. Inflorescence single flowers on long, rounded, finely hairy pedicels 2.5-4" (6-10 cm) long, from the
axils. Flower buds large and inflated, about 1.2" cm) long, oval, green, with fused sepals, each with a spur
near the tip. Flowers 2-3" (5-8 cm) across and highly distinctive. The 5 petals are light bluish to white. Above
them is a whorl of numerous zigzag or twisted white and purple threads. There is an erect central column
supporting 5 thick stamens, green with purple speckles, the anthers drooping at full bloom. The tip of the
column has 3-4 widely spreading style branches. Fruit 1.2-3" (3-8 cm) long, hanging on a long pedicel that
is double-jointed near the end, spherical to oval, with a tough outer skin, at first smooth and green, becoming
straw-yellow and wrinkly, surrounding numerous crunchy seeds 3-4 mm long, each encased in a teardrop
shaped sack of pale to yellowish pulp.
HABITAT: Sunny, well-drained, disturbed sites. Likes vacant lots, forest edges, roadsides, fence lines, brushy
areas, high ground along stream banks. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather the fruit in late summer to fall when the insides are soft and juicy-usually after the skin
becomes slightly wrinkly. You can rip them open and suck out the pulp to eat raw, or you can cook the pulp and
through a strainer to get pulp for pies, jam, or other desserts. Maypops store well, even at room temperature,
andican often be gathered by the bucketload. Tender new leaves and stem tips can be eaten raw or cooked
in spring and early summer.
Flower buds are also edible
COMMENTS: This is one
of the most unexpected
fruits native to North Amer-
ica-a close relative of the
tropical passionfruit sold
commercially. Easy tolden-
tify and gather, it is popular
with foragers across the
South. The greens have a
distinctive flavor that some
relish and others do not.
soceae (Hemp family HERBACEOUS VINES 26 Maypop 3 2 2 Passiflora NG-238 incarnata family Passifloraceae QUICK shaped, CHECK: Herbaceous vine with deeply lobed, small-toothed leaves and egg-sized, green to yellow fruit. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: when Perennial. Stems 10-25' (3-8 m) long, roundish, slightly Stipules young), green, 3-7 mm thick, climbing with long, coiling tendrils. Leaves hairy (more 50 4-5" (10-13 cm) long, deeply 3-lobed, heart-shaped at the base with the rounded alternate, upturned, the lobe tips acuminate-pointed. Sinuses are rounded. The surface is lobes hairy above at first, becoming hairless or nearly so; hairless to densely fine-hairy faintly below. Veins and are depressed above; secondary veins are angled broadly, not forking, arching toward the tip. Margins veinlets small, blunt teeth oriented toward the tip. Petioles stout, 25-40% of blade length, with a pair of large. breast- have like glands on the upper side near the blade. There are small thread-like stipules that fall early in the growing season. Inflorescence single flowers on long, rounded, finely hairy pedicels 2.5-4" (6-10 cm) long, from the axils. Flower buds large and inflated, about 1.2" cm) long, oval, green, with fused sepals, each with a spur near the tip. Flowers 2-3" (5-8 cm) across and highly distinctive. The 5 petals are light bluish to white. Above them is a whorl of numerous zigzag or twisted white and purple threads. There is an erect central column supporting 5 thick stamens, green with purple speckles, the anthers drooping at full bloom. The tip of the column has 3-4 widely spreading style branches. Fruit 1.2-3" (3-8 cm) long, hanging on a long pedicel that is double-jointed near the end, spherical to oval, with a tough outer skin, at first smooth and green, becoming straw-yellow and wrinkly, surrounding numerous crunchy seeds 3-4 mm long, each encased in a teardrop shaped sack of pale to yellowish pulp. HABITAT: Sunny, well-drained, disturbed sites. Likes vacant lots, forest edges, roadsides, fence lines, brushy areas, high ground along stream banks. Native. FOOD USE: Gather the fruit in late summer to fall when the insides are soft and juicy-usually after the skin becomes slightly wrinkly. You can rip them open and suck out the pulp to eat raw, or you can cook the pulp and through a strainer to get pulp for pies, jam, or other desserts. Maypops store well, even at room temperature, andican often be gathered by the bucketload. Tender new leaves and stem tips can be eaten raw or cooked in spring and early summer. Flower buds are also edible COMMENTS: This is one of the most unexpected fruits native to North Amer- ica-a close relative of the tropical passionfruit sold commercially. Easy tolden- tify and gather, it is popular with foragers across the South. The greens have a distinctive flavor that some relish and others do not. 