HERBACEOUS VINES
25 Hops
3
IWE-165
Humulus lupulus
Cannabaceae
(Hemp
family)
QUIC Herbaceous vine with deeply lobed simple leaves, no tendrils, thin raspy
stems. and one-like clusters of fragrant papery fruits. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Thin perennial herbaceous vine from a thick rootstock. Stem 8-30'
(2.4-9 m) long and 3-6 mm thick, unbranched, uniformly green, round in cross section
with 6 small ridges roughened by short spurs pointing toward the base. Lacks tendrils; climbs
by twining. Shoots pointed with thin purplish stipules overlapping at the tip like scales. Tiny
vellowish resin dots may be visible on young leaves. Stipules fused with those from the opposite leaf, the fused
stipules clasping and ovate with a notched tip, thin and papery, 7-11 mm long. Leaves widely spaced, alternate,
deeply 3-5-lobed (occasionally unlobed, or with 7 lobes), 4-6" (10-15 cm) long and almost as wide. The leaf's
upper surface is roughened by scattered stiff hairs, as is the petiole. There are 3-5 major veins from the base,
strongly depressed above; veinlets are depressed but less so. Margins have large teeth tipped with a claw or
bristle. Petiole 70-100% of blade length, rounded, solid, spiny, with a faint groove on top. Inflorescence (sum-
mer) male and female on separate plants. Flowers of both genders are tiny. The female flowers are hidden
by leafy bracts packed into a tight spike (cone); male flowers, borne in panicles, are greenish-white and not
showy. Fruit is a papery capsule, green at first but turning brown, holding one spherical seed.
HABITAT: Rich, moist soil, especially sandy, usually in partial shade but sometimes full sun. Principally
floodplains and streamsides, spreading to forest edges, fence lines, and other brushy areas. Native.
FOOD USE: The shoots or rapidly growing vine tips (spring through early summer) are good (but raspy) raw
and excellent cooked. Papery fruit clusters are used to flavor beer. For this purpose they are harvested in late
summer and then dried. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: Long cultivated and well known as an ingredient in beer, hops is
native and widespread in North America. Feral populations of cultivated hops
also occur but are uncommon. Japanese hops H. japonicus is an invasive annual
species that is locally abundant, thriving in disturbed riparian zones with rich soil.
The leaves usually have 5-7 lobes with deep sinuses between them, and the lobes
are broadened near the tip. The tender vine tips are raspy but marginally edible.
Jaganese hops.
HERBACEOUS VINES 25 Hops 3 IWE-165 Humulus lupulus Cannabaceae (Hemp family) QUIC Herbaceous vine with deeply lobed simple leaves, no tendrils, thin raspy stems. and one-like clusters of fragrant papery fruits. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Thin perennial herbaceous vine from a thick rootstock. Stem 8-30' (2.4-9 m) long and 3-6 mm thick, unbranched, uniformly green, round in cross section with 6 small ridges roughened by short spurs pointing toward the base. Lacks tendrils; climbs by twining. Shoots pointed with thin purplish stipules overlapping at the tip like scales. Tiny vellowish resin dots may be visible on young leaves. Stipules fused with those from the opposite leaf, the fused stipules clasping and ovate with a notched tip, thin and papery, 7-11 mm long. Leaves widely spaced, alternate, deeply 3-5-lobed (occasionally unlobed, or with 7 lobes), 4-6" (10-15 cm) long and almost as wide. The leaf's upper surface is roughened by scattered stiff hairs, as is the petiole. There are 3-5 major veins from the base, strongly depressed above; veinlets are depressed but less so. Margins have large teeth tipped with a claw or bristle. Petiole 70-100% of blade length, rounded, solid, spiny, with a faint groove on top. Inflorescence (sum- mer) male and female on separate plants. Flowers of both genders are tiny. The female flowers are hidden by leafy bracts packed into a tight spike (cone); male flowers, borne in panicles, are greenish-white and not showy. Fruit is a papery capsule, green at first but turning brown, holding one spherical seed. HABITAT: Rich, moist soil, especially sandy, usually in partial shade but sometimes full sun. Principally floodplains and streamsides, spreading to forest edges, fence lines, and other brushy areas. Native. FOOD USE: The shoots or rapidly growing vine tips (spring through early summer) are good (but raspy) raw and excellent cooked. Papery fruit clusters are used to flavor beer. For this purpose they are harvested in late summer and then dried. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: Long cultivated and well known as an ingredient in beer, hops is native and widespread in North America. Feral populations of cultivated hops also occur but are uncommon. Japanese hops H. japonicus is an invasive annual species that is locally abundant, thriving in disturbed riparian zones with rich soil. The leaves usually have 5-7 lobes with deep sinuses between them, and the lobes are broadened near the tip. The tender vine tips are raspy but marginally edible. Jaganese hops. 