buteo Hower family Passifloracese
GROUP 30 BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES WHORLED
ance; The plants there in this few group come from several families and are quite
in this are is generalizations to be made about them. The most dissimilar in appear plant
group the Swedish bunchberry, which has leaves in both whorls problematic and pairs
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 30
The key is not your final answer!
Leaves entire.
Flower
or
Plant with a single whorl of 3 leaves.
Plant with 1 or 2 whorls, at least one of them with more than 3 leaves,
1. Trillium
or
A lower whor! of 6-11 leaves; flowering plants with an upper whorl of 3; stem woolly.
3. Cucumber root
A single whorl of 4 or 6 leaves (6 when flowering); clustered red berries.
4. Bunchberry
Plant with many whorls of leaves along the stem.
Leaves thick and succulent.
or
or
Stems creeping; leaves narrow and pointed, all oriented upward.
6. Whorled stonecrop
Stems weakly erect; leaves spoon-shaped, in flat whorls.
or
7. Woodland stonecrop
Leaves not thick and succulent.
Stem strictly erect, 6-15 mm thick and rounded; flowers 2-6" (5-15 cm) wide.
2. Lily
Stem creeping, reclining, or leaning, 2-3 mm thick, squared; flowers tiny.
8. Cleavers
Plant with whorls only at branch tips; lower leaves paired.
5. Swedish bunchberry
Leaves compound.
Leaflets entire. Point-leaf tick trefoil (p. 645).
Leaflets toothed.
Stems to 9" (23 cm) tall; leaflets sessile, about twice as long as wide; fruits yellow-green,
ripening in late spring.
9. Dwarf ginseng
Stems to 22" (56 cm) tall; leaflets on petiolules, the blades almost as broad as long: fruits red,
ripening in early fall.
10. American ginseng
Trillium
2
genus Trillium
family Melanthiaceae (formerly in Liliaceae)
QUICK CHECK: Three entire leaves atop a smooth, unbranched stem; single large, 3-petaled flower
ID difficulty 3-
DESCRIPTION: Perennial herbs from a stout, short rhizome. Stem single, erect, 6-24" (20-60 cm) high and
for its height, up to 12 mm thick; unbranched, round, smooth, hairless, green or maroon folded or a mottled upward,
stout of the two, terminating in a single whorl of 3 leaves. In the shoot stage it has three leaves (often very
mixture at first; there is no sheath around the lower stem. Leaves sessile, ovate above to elliptic but sometimes
scrolled together the base and sharp at the tip, entire, 2-7" (5-18 cm) long, hairless branches also
broadly), angled below. at Prominent veins arise at the base and reconverge at the tip; are these strongly may depressed, have the blade
soft-hairy nehing toward the tip, and always have pinnate veins between them. Veins and leafy, about as long
Flower (spring) single, sessile or on a pedicel. Sepais 3, green elliptic with pointed
sed between them. Petals 3, larger than the sepals, colored white, yellow, white or maroon, or greenish to red, broad at
the petals, pointed. the surface veiny, with larger veins depressed. Fruit hard-shelled fleshy, seeds.
ingled pointed ends, at the tip, with 6 angles; contains many small,
base, jack-in-the-pulpit (p. 569) is forked with two ternately compound sheath leaves, at
FUSING PLANTS: have a single At maturity leaf. At emergence (about when trilliums downward. begin When to flower) unfurled, JIT the has leaf a venation
Gbase; JITP leaves, like those of other arums, have a prominent blade's edge.
young one plants leaflet points upward and the other two are folded central vein with pinnate secondary veins
indifferent; terminate at a marginal vein running just inside of the
HABITAT: that Hardwood forests on well-drained soil. Native. (Continued on the next page.)
buteo Hower family Passifloracese GROUP 30 BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES WHORLED ance; The plants there in this few group come from several families and are quite in this are is generalizations to be made about them. The most dissimilar in appear plant group the Swedish bunchberry, which has leaves in both whorls problematic and pairs TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 30 The key is not your final answer! Leaves entire. Flower or Plant with a single whorl of 3 leaves. Plant with 1 or 2 whorls, at least one of them with more than 3 leaves, 1. Trillium or A lower whor! of 6-11 leaves; flowering plants with an upper whorl of 3; stem woolly. 3. Cucumber root A single whorl of 4 or 6 leaves (6 when flowering); clustered red berries. 4. Bunchberry Plant with many whorls of leaves along the stem. Leaves thick and succulent. or or Stems creeping; leaves narrow and pointed, all oriented upward. 6. Whorled stonecrop Stems weakly erect; leaves spoon-shaped, in flat whorls. or 7. Woodland stonecrop Leaves not thick and succulent. Stem strictly erect, 6-15 mm thick and rounded; flowers 2-6" (5-15 cm) wide. 2. Lily Stem creeping, reclining, or leaning, 2-3 mm thick, squared; flowers tiny. 8. Cleavers Plant with whorls only at branch tips; lower leaves paired. 5. Swedish bunchberry Leaves compound. Leaflets entire. Point-leaf tick trefoil (p. 645). Leaflets toothed. Stems to 9" (23 cm) tall; leaflets sessile, about twice as long as wide; fruits yellow-green, ripening in late spring. 9. Dwarf ginseng Stems to 22" (56 cm) tall; leaflets on petiolules, the blades almost as broad as long: fruits red, ripening in early fall. 10. American ginseng Trillium 2 genus Trillium family Melanthiaceae (formerly in Liliaceae) QUICK CHECK: Three entire leaves atop a smooth, unbranched stem; single large, 3-petaled flower ID difficulty 3- DESCRIPTION: Perennial herbs from a stout, short rhizome. Stem single, erect, 6-24" (20-60 cm) high and for its height, up to 12 mm thick; unbranched, round, smooth, hairless, green or maroon folded or a mottled upward, stout of the two, terminating in a single whorl of 3 leaves. In the shoot stage it has three leaves (often very mixture at first; there is no sheath around the lower stem. Leaves sessile, ovate above to elliptic but sometimes scrolled together the base and sharp at the tip, entire, 2-7" (5-18 cm) long, hairless branches also broadly), angled below. at Prominent veins arise at the base and reconverge at the tip; are these strongly may depressed, have the blade soft-hairy nehing toward the tip, and always have pinnate veins between them. Veins and leafy, about as long Flower (spring) single, sessile or on a pedicel. Sepais 3, green elliptic with pointed sed between them. Petals 3, larger than the sepals, colored white, yellow, white or maroon, or greenish to red, broad at the petals, pointed. the surface veiny, with larger veins depressed. Fruit hard-shelled fleshy, seeds. ingled pointed ends, at the tip, with 6 angles; contains many small, base, jack-in-the-pulpit (p. 569) is forked with two ternately compound sheath leaves, at FUSING PLANTS: have a single At maturity leaf. At emergence (about when trilliums downward. begin When to flower) unfurled, JIT the has leaf a venation Gbase; JITP leaves, like those of other arums, have a prominent blade's edge. young one plants leaflet points upward and the other two are folded central vein with pinnate secondary veins indifferent; terminate at a marginal vein running just inside of the HABITAT: that Hardwood forests on well-drained soil. Native. (Continued on the next page.) 