HERBACEOUS VINES
1
2
2
Yellow passion flower
Passiflora lutea , family Passifloraceae
NEW K: Very thin vine with flat. leaves of 3 rounded lobes, complex yellow-green 1.
flowers our h/a 4 spheric truit. and thin tendrils of ten coiled like a spring. ID difficulty
DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Stems 6-12' (2-3 m) long and 2-3 mm thick, gently ridged,
hairless, often twisted, mostly green but dark purple near the nodes. Leaves alternate,
2-2.5 (5- 6.5 cm) long and about as broad, 3-lobed, the lobes gently rounded and toothless,
the blade hairless and remarkably flat. Veins all flat above and gently protruding below,
the secondary veins 75° to the major veins, straight at first then curving and breaking up before reaching
the margin. Petioles not channeled, purplish near the base, 40-60% of blade length and at a right angle to
it. Stipules light yellow-green, 3-4 mm, claw-like, wrapping around the stem. Tendrils long and thread-like,
unbranched, often densely coiled like a spring. Flower buds to 0.7" (18 mm) long, blunt, cylindrical, yellow-
green, slightly bulged at the base, paired at nodes on thread-like pedicels to 1.3" (33 mm) long. Flowers about
1" (2.5 cm) across, composed of 5 narrow, yellow-green petals alternating with broader, blunt sepals of the
same color but about 50% longer. There is a ring of numerous wavy, yellow-green, thread-like appendages and
another ring of numerous short filaments around a 5-part pistil. Fruit is nearly spherical, black, soft, about 0.6"
(15 mm) across, the several seeds zebra-striped lengthwise.
HABITAT: Fertile brushy areas, usually in partial sun; floodplains, roadsides, forest margins, near lakes and
wetlands. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender young leaves, vine tips, and flower buds can be eaten raw or cooked from late spring
through midsummer. Ripe fruit (late summer to fall) can also be eaten. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: The fruit is lame-scarcely worth mentioning as edible. However, the tender tips are quite good,
and I enjoy eating them raw. The flower is not nearly so large and showy as that of most passion flowers, but
a close look reveals the same unusual and complex form. This is the nor thernmost species of passion flower.
HERBACEOUS VINES 1 2 2 Yellow passion flower Passiflora lutea , family Passifloraceae NEW K: Very thin vine with flat. leaves of 3 rounded lobes, complex yellow-green 1. flowers our h/a 4 spheric truit. and thin tendrils of ten coiled like a spring. ID difficulty DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Stems 6-12' (2-3 m) long and 2-3 mm thick, gently ridged, hairless, often twisted, mostly green but dark purple near the nodes. Leaves alternate, 2-2.5 (5- 6.5 cm) long and about as broad, 3-lobed, the lobes gently rounded and toothless, the blade hairless and remarkably flat. Veins all flat above and gently protruding below, the secondary veins 75° to the major veins, straight at first then curving and breaking up before reaching the margin. Petioles not channeled, purplish near the base, 40-60% of blade length and at a right angle to it. Stipules light yellow-green, 3-4 mm, claw-like, wrapping around the stem. Tendrils long and thread-like, unbranched, often densely coiled like a spring. Flower buds to 0.7" (18 mm) long, blunt, cylindrical, yellow- green, slightly bulged at the base, paired at nodes on thread-like pedicels to 1.3" (33 mm) long. Flowers about 1" (2.5 cm) across, composed of 5 narrow, yellow-green petals alternating with broader, blunt sepals of the same color but about 50% longer. There is a ring of numerous wavy, yellow-green, thread-like appendages and another ring of numerous short filaments around a 5-part pistil. Fruit is nearly spherical, black, soft, about 0.6" (15 mm) across, the several seeds zebra-striped lengthwise. HABITAT: Fertile brushy areas, usually in partial sun; floodplains, roadsides, forest margins, near lakes and wetlands. Native. FOOD USE: Tender young leaves, vine tips, and flower buds can be eaten raw or cooked from late spring through midsummer. Ripe fruit (late summer to fall) can also be eaten. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: The fruit is lame-scarcely worth mentioning as edible. However, the tender tips are quite good, and I enjoy eating them raw. The flower is not nearly so large and showy as that of most passion flowers, but a close look reveals the same unusual and complex form. This is the nor thernmost species of passion flower. 