1
LEAVES
ASSENT,
WHOMLED
Lily
2
genus Lilium
Liliaceae (Lily family)
a QUICK di large CHECK: flowers Straight, with 6 spotted erect, unbranched petals. ID difficulty stem with 2. whorls of narrow,
Stems DESCRIPTION: erect, Perennials from a bulb that is surrounded by white bulblets
White
1-6' (30-180 single, hairless, glaucous, rounded, sometimes faintly or bulb-scales.
taillum
tered alternate cm) tall and 6-15 mm thick. Leaves in whorls of 4-11, ridged, unbranched,
hairless, leaves between them. (All leaves are alternate in L. occasionally lancifolium.) with scat-
sessile, 2-7" (5-18 cm) long, narrowly lanceolate or elliptic (almost They are
Inflorescence a single flower or cluster, at the apex or from upper leaf axils, the above.
pointed tips and entire margins. Veins parallel, the major ones deeply depressed linear), with
Turk's capitily
long, often nodding, and often with a single bract. Flower buds 1-2" (2.5-5 long, pedicels
longer than wide. Flowers (summer) showy, 2-6" (5-15 cm) wide, with 6 petals, recurved much
slightly to drastically, mostly reddish to orange or yellow with spots at least near the base.
There are 6 long stamens, the thick filaments usually curving away from the central style.
Fruit an elongated 3-part capsule containing many seeds.
FOOD USE: Bulblets at the base (underground) are sweet and starchy and can be eaten
raw or cooked, but are better cooked. Conservation 3.
Wood lily
COMMENTS: Lilies are wildflowers of striking beauty that are easy to spot and recognize. Long-lived and
rarely abundant, they are destroyed when collected, and should generally only be gathered in true emergen-
cies, or where development is about to claim their habitat. The edible part is small in proportion to the size
of the plant. The two species I have eaten are shown here.
Turk's cap lily is a group of species that has been classed as one in the past, and is now divided into L. michi-
ganense, L. canadense, and L. superbum. These similar species are found in openings in forests with moist, rich
soil-especially floodplains. In some regions they colonize roadside ditches. The flowers are on drooping
pedicels in whorls, or in the case of L. superbum, in a large raceme at the top.
Wood Lily L. philadelphicum is a shorter species of dry, open areas such as pine barrens and oak savannahs.
The flowers are few in number in a terminal cluster, turned skyward rather than nodding in bloom; the petals
are narrowed to a stalk-like base.
This small
cilium michi-
gunense plant
has a few
white bulblets
at the base
Alley
505
(above) Lilium philadelphicum. (right) Lilium michiganense.
1 LEAVES ASSENT, WHOMLED Lily 2 genus Lilium Liliaceae (Lily family) a QUICK di large CHECK: flowers Straight, with 6 spotted erect, unbranched petals. ID difficulty stem with 2. whorls of narrow, Stems DESCRIPTION: erect, Perennials from a bulb that is surrounded by white bulblets White 1-6' (30-180 single, hairless, glaucous, rounded, sometimes faintly or bulb-scales. taillum tered alternate cm) tall and 6-15 mm thick. Leaves in whorls of 4-11, ridged, unbranched, hairless, leaves between them. (All leaves are alternate in L. occasionally lancifolium.) with scat- sessile, 2-7" (5-18 cm) long, narrowly lanceolate or elliptic (almost They are Inflorescence a single flower or cluster, at the apex or from upper leaf axils, the above. pointed tips and entire margins. Veins parallel, the major ones deeply depressed linear), with Turk's capitily long, often nodding, and often with a single bract. Flower buds 1-2" (2.5-5 long, pedicels longer than wide. Flowers (summer) showy, 2-6" (5-15 cm) wide, with 6 petals, recurved much slightly to drastically, mostly reddish to orange or yellow with spots at least near the base. There are 6 long stamens, the thick filaments usually curving away from the central style. Fruit an elongated 3-part capsule containing many seeds. FOOD USE: Bulblets at the base (underground) are sweet and starchy and can be eaten raw or cooked, but are better cooked. Conservation 3. Wood lily COMMENTS: Lilies are wildflowers of striking beauty that are easy to spot and recognize. Long-lived and rarely abundant, they are destroyed when collected, and should generally only be gathered in true emergen- cies, or where development is about to claim their habitat. The edible part is small in proportion to the size of the plant. The two species I have eaten are shown here. Turk's cap lily is a group of species that has been classed as one in the past, and is now divided into L. michi- ganense, L. canadense, and L. superbum. These similar species are found in openings in forests with moist, rich soil-especially floodplains. In some regions they colonize roadside ditches. The flowers are on drooping pedicels in whorls, or in the case of L. superbum, in a large raceme at the top. Wood Lily L. philadelphicum is a shorter species of dry, open areas such as pine barrens and oak savannahs. The flowers are few in number in a terminal cluster, turned skyward rather than nodding in bloom; the petals are narrowed to a stalk-like base. This small cilium michi- gunense plant has a few white bulblets at the base Alley 505 (above) Lilium philadelphicum. (right) Lilium michiganense. 