BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES WHORLED
Trillium (continued)
FOOD 1 USE: The young shoots, while the leaves are drooping or folded, can be eaten raw or cooked. I think
taste better than the leaves. Conservation 3.
the stems okay, not excellent. There are numerous species of trillium species in our area. protected. Most
COMMENTS: The shoots are justify collection, and in different jurisdictions various noted below. Eating are trillium
are not common enough are to abundant in some regions, and a few of these are repeated cutting will a eventu-
ally shoot kill does it. Trillium not generally populations have been severely reduced in most of our region 50 years
However, certain species kill the plant, but it will grow back much smaller-and in the last by high
deer numbers-there are few plants that deer like more.
Large white trillium Trillium grandiflorum is by far the
most common species across the northern US and
southern Canada. The stems reach 24" (60 cm) tall;
shoots usually emerge green. The flowers are white,
2-4" (5-10 cm) across, on a pedicel up to 4" (10 cm)
long, the petals overlapping at the base. The fruits are
small, strongly ridged, and whitish.
Trillium grandiflorum.
Trillium grandiflorum shoots.
Trillium recurvatum is called prairie trillium, but it grows
mostly in forests and savannahs. It is one of our taller
species, reaching 18" (46 cm). The stems are mottled
maroon and green. The leaves are distinctly blotchy
and narrowed at the base so there are gaps between
them. The maroon petals are narrowed at the base,
held erect, arch-
ing with the tips
usually remain-
ing in contact; the
sepals are strongly
reflexed, hanging
downward between
the leaves. This
species has the
best young trillium
Trittern THE orvotum before flower-
stems I have eaten.
the will. render stem
Trillium recurvatum.
Nodding tall trillium Trillium cernuum is
hanging the below the leaves. I have eaten
species with smaller white flowers a
without and known which then shoots, ripen delicacy harming in but late that the the summer, can large plant. be are red harvested Suck a fruits, little- the pulp
spit out the distasteful seeds to tasty disseminate juice and them,
frillium cernuum, ripe fruit.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES WHORLED Trillium (continued) FOOD 1 USE: The young shoots, while the leaves are drooping or folded, can be eaten raw or cooked. I think taste better than the leaves. Conservation 3. the stems okay, not excellent. There are numerous species of trillium species in our area. protected. Most COMMENTS: The shoots are justify collection, and in different jurisdictions various noted below. Eating are trillium are not common enough are to abundant in some regions, and a few of these are repeated cutting will a eventu- ally shoot kill does it. Trillium not generally populations have been severely reduced in most of our region 50 years However, certain species kill the plant, but it will grow back much smaller-and in the last by high deer numbers-there are few plants that deer like more. Large white trillium Trillium grandiflorum is by far the most common species across the northern US and southern Canada. The stems reach 24" (60 cm) tall; shoots usually emerge green. The flowers are white, 2-4" (5-10 cm) across, on a pedicel up to 4" (10 cm) long, the petals overlapping at the base. The fruits are small, strongly ridged, and whitish. Trillium grandiflorum. Trillium grandiflorum shoots. Trillium recurvatum is called prairie trillium, but it grows mostly in forests and savannahs. It is one of our taller species, reaching 18" (46 cm). The stems are mottled maroon and green. The leaves are distinctly blotchy and narrowed at the base so there are gaps between them. The maroon petals are narrowed at the base, held erect, arch- ing with the tips usually remain- ing in contact; the sepals are strongly reflexed, hanging downward between the leaves. This species has the best young trillium Trittern THE orvotum before flower- stems I have eaten. the will. render stem Trillium recurvatum. Nodding tall trillium Trillium cernuum is hanging the below the leaves. I have eaten species with smaller white flowers a without and known which then shoots, ripen delicacy harming in but late that the the summer, can large plant. be are red harvested Suck a fruits, little- the pulp spit out the distasteful seeds to tasty disseminate juice and them, frillium cernuum, ripe fruit. 