4
Bunchberry
2
NG-333
Cornus canadensis
Cornaceae (Dogwood family)
QUICK ister of CHECK: red Short herb with tough entire leaves in whorls of 6, and
berries. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: unbranched, Perennial herb from creeping woody rhizomes.
Fruiting plants 4-8" have (10-20 cm) tall and 1-2 mm thick, with a single whorl Stems single, th
Leaves sessile, 6 leaves, and 2 of them are usually much smaller of 1 or 6 leaves
stiff (but 1.5-3" (4-8 long, elliptic, entire, pointed at both ends, than the others.
surface. There not thick are or stiff for an evergreen leaf). The upper side has scattered evergreen, stiff rather hairs
reconverging near 2-3 major secondary veins per side, all arising in the proximal third of the pressed agains the
Inflorescence the tip; these and the midvein are very deeply depressed above. Smaller blade. arching and
cluster the a tightly packed umbel subtended by a set of 4 white bracts that look like petals, veins are obscure
appearance of one large, 4-petaled flower. The actual flowers are tiny with 4 giving the whole
petals hard seed. and a blackish pistil. Berries ripen to bright orange-red but have whitish flesh; each square-tippea contains a sin Nh g'e. te
HABITAT: Native. Moist, organic, acidic soil in partial sun. Coniferous and mixed forests, low woods. bog margins
FOOD USE: Ripe berries can be collected in late summer and sometimes into fall. They have a weak but
pleasant flavor and make a nice trail nibble. The seeds stick to the pulp and are thus hard to spit cut, bu can
be harmlessly swallowed. Whole berries, seed and all, can be mashed or blended and eaten as a kin of sauce
or pudding. This fruit is better raw than cooked. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: One of the iconic wild plants of the Northwoods, the ubiquitous and beautiful burchberry
seems to be the most popular photography subject in the boreal forest. AKA crackerberry, because the seeds
are often crunched to eat the fruit.
Related edible:
Cornus suecica
2
5 than the common bunchberry, but has smaller, mostly paired leaves crowded only
Swedish bunchberry
This is a taller plant mm) long. The topmost leaves are often whorled (or in pairs of upper so leaves,
0.6-1.4" as (15-35 whorled). The stem is often branched at 45° from the axils purple. The berries
these to appear branches ending in a whorl of leaves. The tiny flowers are dark than those
are darker red and slightly larger
of bunchberry grows in open. moist areas in the Far have North,
bunchberry, but borne in smaller clusters.
Swedish meadows and coastal tundra. The bunchbarries- berries :
especially more intense and fruitier flavor than easter to
somewhat importantly. the seed shells are thinner and quantities
chew. but more In some locations they can be collected in great
507
4 Bunchberry 2 NG-333 Cornus canadensis Cornaceae (Dogwood family) QUICK ister of CHECK: red Short herb with tough entire leaves in whorls of 6, and berries. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: unbranched, Perennial herb from creeping woody rhizomes. Fruiting plants 4-8" have (10-20 cm) tall and 1-2 mm thick, with a single whorl Stems single, th Leaves sessile, 6 leaves, and 2 of them are usually much smaller of 1 or 6 leaves stiff (but 1.5-3" (4-8 long, elliptic, entire, pointed at both ends, than the others. surface. There not thick are or stiff for an evergreen leaf). The upper side has scattered evergreen, stiff rather hairs reconverging near 2-3 major secondary veins per side, all arising in the proximal third of the pressed agains the Inflorescence the tip; these and the midvein are very deeply depressed above. Smaller blade. arching and cluster the a tightly packed umbel subtended by a set of 4 white bracts that look like petals, veins are obscure appearance of one large, 4-petaled flower. The actual flowers are tiny with 4 giving the whole petals hard seed. and a blackish pistil. Berries ripen to bright orange-red but have whitish flesh; each square-tippea contains a sin Nh g'e. te HABITAT: Native. Moist, organic, acidic soil in partial sun. Coniferous and mixed forests, low woods. bog margins FOOD USE: Ripe berries can be collected in late summer and sometimes into fall. They have a weak but pleasant flavor and make a nice trail nibble. The seeds stick to the pulp and are thus hard to spit cut, bu can be harmlessly swallowed. Whole berries, seed and all, can be mashed or blended and eaten as a kin of sauce or pudding. This fruit is better raw than cooked. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: One of the iconic wild plants of the Northwoods, the ubiquitous and beautiful burchberry seems to be the most popular photography subject in the boreal forest. AKA crackerberry, because the seeds are often crunched to eat the fruit. Related edible: Cornus suecica 2 5 than the common bunchberry, but has smaller, mostly paired leaves crowded only Swedish bunchberry This is a taller plant mm) long. The topmost leaves are often whorled (or in pairs of upper so leaves, 0.6-1.4" as (15-35 whorled). The stem is often branched at 45° from the axils purple. The berries these to appear branches ending in a whorl of leaves. The tiny flowers are dark than those are darker red and slightly larger of bunchberry grows in open. moist areas in the Far have North, bunchberry, but borne in smaller clusters. Swedish meadows and coastal tundra. The bunchbarries- berries : especially more intense and fruitier flavor than easter to somewhat importantly. the seed shells are thinner and quantities chew. but more In some locations they can be collected in great 507 