BASAL
LEAVES
3 Cucumber root
3
Medeola virginiana
Liliaceae
(Lily
family)
QUICK CHECK: Erect, thin, single stem with one whorl of 5-11 narrow, pointed leaves,
plus a second whorl of 3 on flowering plants. ID difficulty 2.
Small perennial herb from a white tuber to 2" (5 cm) long and 0.6" the (15 surface mm)
DESCRIPTION: horizontally to one side of the stem immediately at the base, straight, solid
thick, positioned but with bumps where roots attach. Stems single, erect, rounded, mm thick;
smooth pinhole hollow, stiff, smooth, unbranched, to 22" (56 cm) tall and 1-2.5 base and the
very There be a few whitish papery sheaths near the stem base. Leaves most often there there is a
or with fine a wool lays on the surface when young, persisting longer near the whorled;
leaves. whorl of may 6 on non-flowering specimens, and an additional whorl of 3 on flowering plants-but is may
occasionally single be more whorls containing up to 11. The center of the whorl on nonflowering plants maroon on
top. Blades linear-lanceolate, pointed at the tip and tapered to the base, entire, sessile, 1.5-4" (4-10 cm) long,
curved upward, glossy, smooth. The leaf underside has fine wool, sparse near the tip but thicker near the base;
it may wear off late in the season. Veins depressed above and protruding below. There is one prominent vein
on each side of the midvein, converging at the tip. Inflorescence a terminal umbel of 3-10, borne just above the
upper whorl of leaves and often hanging below them. Flowers (summer) about 0.9" (23 cm) across, greenish
to light yellow with 6 recurved tepals. Fruit a globose berry 5-7 mm in diameter, ripening to dark blue-black.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Starflower Trientalis borealis is similar in appearance and often shares the habitat
of cucumber root, but is shorter with narrower leaves in a single whorl. It has a small, tough rhizome. The
whorled pogonias (genus Isotria) have only one or two flowers, and these have 3 petals and 3 long sepals; when
not flowering they can be told from cucumber root by the hollow stems lacking wool, and by the tendency to
have fewer and broader leaves in each whorl. Several lilies (genus Lilium) also have whorls, and when very
young may resemble cucumber root, but they are not woolly, have longer leaves, and have bulblet clusters
rather than tubers.
HABITAT: Moist, organic, usually mildly acidic soil in hardwood or mixed conifer-hardwood forests, in
moderate to heavy shade. Native.
FOOD USE: Dig tubers at any time of year (best when the top is dormant), clean and eat raw or cooked.
They can be pickled, used in salads, or served as a cooked
vegetable. Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: The rhizomes are delicious-much better than
cucumbers. However, they are easy to overharvest and should
be reserved for an occasional treat.
506
BASAL LEAVES 3 Cucumber root 3 Medeola virginiana Liliaceae (Lily family) QUICK CHECK: Erect, thin, single stem with one whorl of 5-11 narrow, pointed leaves, plus a second whorl of 3 on flowering plants. ID difficulty 2. Small perennial herb from a white tuber to 2" (5 cm) long and 0.6" the (15 surface mm) DESCRIPTION: horizontally to one side of the stem immediately at the base, straight, solid thick, positioned but with bumps where roots attach. Stems single, erect, rounded, mm thick; smooth pinhole hollow, stiff, smooth, unbranched, to 22" (56 cm) tall and 1-2.5 base and the very There be a few whitish papery sheaths near the stem base. Leaves most often there there is a or with fine a wool lays on the surface when young, persisting longer near the whorled; leaves. whorl of may 6 on non-flowering specimens, and an additional whorl of 3 on flowering plants-but is may occasionally single be more whorls containing up to 11. The center of the whorl on nonflowering plants maroon on top. Blades linear-lanceolate, pointed at the tip and tapered to the base, entire, sessile, 1.5-4" (4-10 cm) long, curved upward, glossy, smooth. The leaf underside has fine wool, sparse near the tip but thicker near the base; it may wear off late in the season. Veins depressed above and protruding below. There is one prominent vein on each side of the midvein, converging at the tip. Inflorescence a terminal umbel of 3-10, borne just above the upper whorl of leaves and often hanging below them. Flowers (summer) about 0.9" (23 cm) across, greenish to light yellow with 6 recurved tepals. Fruit a globose berry 5-7 mm in diameter, ripening to dark blue-black. CONFUSING PLANTS: Starflower Trientalis borealis is similar in appearance and often shares the habitat of cucumber root, but is shorter with narrower leaves in a single whorl. It has a small, tough rhizome. The whorled pogonias (genus Isotria) have only one or two flowers, and these have 3 petals and 3 long sepals; when not flowering they can be told from cucumber root by the hollow stems lacking wool, and by the tendency to have fewer and broader leaves in each whorl. Several lilies (genus Lilium) also have whorls, and when very young may resemble cucumber root, but they are not woolly, have longer leaves, and have bulblet clusters rather than tubers. HABITAT: Moist, organic, usually mildly acidic soil in hardwood or mixed conifer-hardwood forests, in moderate to heavy shade. Native. FOOD USE: Dig tubers at any time of year (best when the top is dormant), clean and eat raw or cooked. They can be pickled, used in salads, or served as a cooked vegetable. Conservation 3. COMMENTS: The rhizomes are delicious-much better than cucumbers. However, they are easy to overharvest and should be reserved for an occasional treat. 506 