LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES WHOREED
7 Woodland stonecrop
2
Sedum ternatum
family Crassulaceae
QUICK aped leaves CHECK: Tiny, succulent, evergreen, hairless forest plant with
in whorls. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Stems reddish Low, evergreen perennial often forming mats
weakly erect to green, about 7" solid, (18 cm) creeping under litter and rooting or at clumps. the nodes, All parts then hairless
long, The packed, cluster lowest thick with layered and leaves a few whorl, succulent, curving may the be leaves raceme paired, broadly tall, of branches but the spoon-shaped, the most upper aerial splitting leaves layer parts are much flat, at not in broad branched. and whorls smaller. forks, sessile of Blades 3 Leaves spreading or with occasionally are entire to sparkle-studded. 0.7" above margins (18 turning 4. the mm) At vegetative the apex Inflorescence "5 stems. a densely- with a
slightly overlapping flowers rather
evenly spaced on very short pedi-
cels, oriented skyward when open.
Flowers 9-11 mm across usually
with 4 narrow, pointed, white bet
als, creased along a central vein.
Between these are 4 shorter green
sepals. Dark anthers give the flowers
a peppered look. Fruit composed of
5 fused pods (follicles).
HABITAT: Rich hardwood forests
on rocks, logs. or moist soil. Most
common on rocky slopes in heavy
shade. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender leaves and stem
tips can be eaten raw or cooked any
time of year, but especially spring
and early summer. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This common and
widespread edible makes a fun
nibble. The leaves are not acrid
or astringent like those of many
sedums. AKA mountain stone-
crop, whorled stonecrop, 3-leaved
stonecrop.
LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES WHOREED 7 Woodland stonecrop 2 Sedum ternatum family Crassulaceae QUICK aped leaves CHECK: Tiny, succulent, evergreen, hairless forest plant with in whorls. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Stems reddish Low, evergreen perennial often forming mats weakly erect to green, about 7" solid, (18 cm) creeping under litter and rooting or at clumps. the nodes, All parts then hairless long, The packed, cluster lowest thick with layered and leaves a few whorl, succulent, curving may the be leaves raceme paired, broadly tall, of branches but the spoon-shaped, the most upper aerial splitting leaves layer parts are much flat, at not in broad branched. and whorls smaller. forks, sessile of Blades 3 Leaves spreading or with occasionally are entire to sparkle-studded. 0.7" above margins (18 turning 4. the mm) At vegetative the apex Inflorescence "5 stems. a densely- with a slightly overlapping flowers rather evenly spaced on very short pedi- cels, oriented skyward when open. Flowers 9-11 mm across usually with 4 narrow, pointed, white bet als, creased along a central vein. Between these are 4 shorter green sepals. Dark anthers give the flowers a peppered look. Fruit composed of 5 fused pods (follicles). HABITAT: Rich hardwood forests on rocks, logs. or moist soil. Most common on rocky slopes in heavy shade. Native. FOOD USE: Tender leaves and stem tips can be eaten raw or cooked any time of year, but especially spring and early summer. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This common and widespread edible makes a fun nibble. The leaves are not acrid or astringent like those of many sedums. AKA mountain stone- crop, whorled stonecrop, 3-leaved stonecrop. 