BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES WHORLED
6 Whorled stonecrop
2
Sedum sarmentosum
family Crassulaceae
QUICK CHECK: Mat-forming, prostrate plant with thick, fleshy, narrow leaves in sets
of three, all oriented toward the upper side. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial creeping along the ground and forming mats. Stems to 10"
(25 cm) long, thinner than the leaves, smooth and round, pale brownish, branching occasion-
ally. Leaves sessile, insets of three but all are oriented toward the upper side. Blades 0.2-0.9"
(5-23 mm) long, light green, elliptic, hairless, tapered to both ends, with pointed tips;
they are thick and fleshy but flat on both sides. Leaves get smaller toward the branch tips. Inflorescence a
widely-spreading cluster of a few zigzag spikes held 3-6" (8-15 cm) above the leaves, the flowers borne with
reduced leaves. Flowers (late spring to early summer) 12-14 mm across, sessile, oriented skyward. Sepais 5,
lanceolate, fleshy, green. Petals 5, lanceolate, yellow, sharp-pointed, depressed in the center, slightly longer
than the sepals. At the center are 5 yellow pistils in a star-
like cluster, and dark anthers at the end of long filaments.
Fruit a cluster of 5 tiny united pods (follicles).
CONFUSING PLANTS: At a glance it looks sort of like the
commonly cultivated Sedum acre, which is bitter and inedible,
but that plant has shorter and stouter leaves not in whorls.
HABITAT: Rocky or sandy well-drained sunny areas: ledges,
cliffs, and bluffs. Introduced.
FOOD USE: The leaves have a mild, slightly tangy flavor
and can be eaten raw or cooked from spring through early
fall, but they are best in spring and early summer.
COMMENTS: Easy to identify, easy to use, beautiful in
bloom. This is one of our most widespread and best tasting
introduced sedums. AKA stringy stonecrop.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES WHORLED 6 Whorled stonecrop 2 Sedum sarmentosum family Crassulaceae QUICK CHECK: Mat-forming, prostrate plant with thick, fleshy, narrow leaves in sets of three, all oriented toward the upper side. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial creeping along the ground and forming mats. Stems to 10" (25 cm) long, thinner than the leaves, smooth and round, pale brownish, branching occasion- ally. Leaves sessile, insets of three but all are oriented toward the upper side. Blades 0.2-0.9" (5-23 mm) long, light green, elliptic, hairless, tapered to both ends, with pointed tips; they are thick and fleshy but flat on both sides. Leaves get smaller toward the branch tips. Inflorescence a widely-spreading cluster of a few zigzag spikes held 3-6" (8-15 cm) above the leaves, the flowers borne with reduced leaves. Flowers (late spring to early summer) 12-14 mm across, sessile, oriented skyward. Sepais 5, lanceolate, fleshy, green. Petals 5, lanceolate, yellow, sharp-pointed, depressed in the center, slightly longer than the sepals. At the center are 5 yellow pistils in a star- like cluster, and dark anthers at the end of long filaments. Fruit a cluster of 5 tiny united pods (follicles). CONFUSING PLANTS: At a glance it looks sort of like the commonly cultivated Sedum acre, which is bitter and inedible, but that plant has shorter and stouter leaves not in whorls. HABITAT: Rocky or sandy well-drained sunny areas: ledges, cliffs, and bluffs. Introduced. FOOD USE: The leaves have a mild, slightly tangy flavor and can be eaten raw or cooked from spring through early fall, but they are best in spring and early summer. COMMENTS: Easy to identify, easy to use, beautiful in bloom. This is one of our most widespread and best tasting introduced sedums. AKA stringy stonecrop. 