BASAL
8 Cleavers
1
family
Rubiaceae
QUICK Galium CHECK: Reclining aparine or weakly erect plant with raspy, clinging stems and whorls
of linear leaves. ID difficulty prostrate 1. or trailing herb. Stems to 4' (1.2 m) falling long and 2-3 square mm
DESCRIPTION: several Annual per plant, erect in dense vegetation but eventually bristles. Leaves over, in whorls
thick, usually the angles with narrow wings, hairs, and toward the abrupt,
with a small round hollow, tapered at the base, very narrow but wider incurved
Very sparse in
of 6-9, entire, sessile, The upper surface is minutely bumpy and hairy. Margins below; are other veins
the dry West.
and bristly. Midvein that from below there appears to be a faint wavy vein running branch the tips. length Flowers of the 1-2 leaf, mm
blunt, bristled tip. depressed above and sharply keeled with spines
are not evident, small except stalked whorl-like clusters of 1-5 growing from leaf axils or covered with tiny
Inflorescence with ovate white petals with nipple tips and 4 stamens. Fruit tiny, spherical, at spines
by across which they 4 cling weakly to clothing; they turn light brown and separate into two parts maturity, releasing
a single seed that composes most of its volume.
HABITAT: Moist, rich soil high in organic matter, typically in half shade. Often found in disturbed woodlots,
forest edges, wooded pastures, brushy areas. Native.
FOOD USE: The tender spring growth can be eaten raw or cooked-before it gets raspy enough to be irritating.
Because of the coarse texture it is best cooked, or used in a smoothie. Dry seeds can be roasted and ground
to make a coffee-like drink. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: There are many species in this genus; Galium aparine is perhaps the most abundant and also
one of the largest, often growing in thick colonies. It is actually in the same botanical family as coffee, although
one would never guess by glancing at the two plants. Cleavers "coffee" is frequently mentioned in the wild
food literature but few people actually try it, probably because the seeds are tedious to collect and winnow.
However, the flavor is pleasantly reminiscent of coffee. The presence of caffeine is widely reported in the
literature, but I have not seen a primary source for this claim.
RELATED EDIBLES: Other species of Galium are safe, but some are bitter or tough.
Fragrant bedstraw Galium triflorum is a forest plant that grows to about 3' (1m) long, the stems raspy especially
near the base, spreading or leaning on other plants. Leaves are ovate to elliptic, in whorls of 6, raspy mostly
just.on the midvein below. Flowers are in groups of 3 from leaf axils. The leaves have a strong vanilla flavor
when dried and can be infused as a flavoring.
Smooth bedstraw G. mollugo is an introduced plant of fields. It is not
raspy, The leaves are very narrowly elliptic and are borne in whorls of
mostly 8. The inflorescence is a large branching cluster held above
the leaves. Smooth bedstraw has tender stems and leaves in spring.
(bottom left) G. triflorum, (right) G. mollugo, young shoots.
The other photos show G. aparine.
BASAL 8 Cleavers 1 family Rubiaceae QUICK Galium CHECK: Reclining aparine or weakly erect plant with raspy, clinging stems and whorls of linear leaves. ID difficulty prostrate 1. or trailing herb. Stems to 4' (1.2 m) falling long and 2-3 square mm DESCRIPTION: several Annual per plant, erect in dense vegetation but eventually bristles. Leaves over, in whorls thick, usually the angles with narrow wings, hairs, and toward the abrupt, with a small round hollow, tapered at the base, very narrow but wider incurved Very sparse in of 6-9, entire, sessile, The upper surface is minutely bumpy and hairy. Margins below; are other veins the dry West. and bristly. Midvein that from below there appears to be a faint wavy vein running branch the tips. length Flowers of the 1-2 leaf, mm blunt, bristled tip. depressed above and sharply keeled with spines are not evident, small except stalked whorl-like clusters of 1-5 growing from leaf axils or covered with tiny Inflorescence with ovate white petals with nipple tips and 4 stamens. Fruit tiny, spherical, at spines by across which they 4 cling weakly to clothing; they turn light brown and separate into two parts maturity, releasing a single seed that composes most of its volume. HABITAT: Moist, rich soil high in organic matter, typically in half shade. Often found in disturbed woodlots, forest edges, wooded pastures, brushy areas. Native. FOOD USE: The tender spring growth can be eaten raw or cooked-before it gets raspy enough to be irritating. Because of the coarse texture it is best cooked, or used in a smoothie. Dry seeds can be roasted and ground to make a coffee-like drink. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: There are many species in this genus; Galium aparine is perhaps the most abundant and also one of the largest, often growing in thick colonies. It is actually in the same botanical family as coffee, although one would never guess by glancing at the two plants. Cleavers "coffee" is frequently mentioned in the wild food literature but few people actually try it, probably because the seeds are tedious to collect and winnow. However, the flavor is pleasantly reminiscent of coffee. The presence of caffeine is widely reported in the literature, but I have not seen a primary source for this claim. RELATED EDIBLES: Other species of Galium are safe, but some are bitter or tough. Fragrant bedstraw Galium triflorum is a forest plant that grows to about 3' (1m) long, the stems raspy especially near the base, spreading or leaning on other plants. Leaves are ovate to elliptic, in whorls of 6, raspy mostly just.on the midvein below. Flowers are in groups of 3 from leaf axils. The leaves have a strong vanilla flavor when dried and can be infused as a flavoring. Smooth bedstraw G. mollugo is an introduced plant of fields. It is not raspy, The leaves are very narrowly elliptic and are borne in whorls of mostly 8. The inflorescence is a large branching cluster held above the leaves. Smooth bedstraw has tender stems and leaves in spring. (bottom left) G. triflorum, (right) G. mollugo, young shoots. The other photos show G. aparine. 