BABAL LEAVES AUSENT,LEAVES WHOREED
9
Dwarf ginseng
2
Panax trifolius
Araliaceae (Ginseng family)
QUICK CHECK: Small herb with a single whorl of 3 compound leaves, each with
.ssile leaflets; one central umbel of tiny white flowers. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial spring ephemeral from an enlarged spherical tuber 0.2-0.6"
(5-15 mm) in diameter, typically 2-4" (5-10 underground. Stems 3-9' (8-23 cm) tall and
1-3 mm thick, single, erect, unbranched, rounded, smooth, and hairless. Leaves in a single
whorl of 3 (rarely 4), each palmately compound with 3-5 (more often 3) sessile leaflets.
Petioles reddish, channeled, 60-80% of the terminal leaflet's length. Leaflets 0.5-2.5"
(13-65 mm) long, elliptic or oval to lanceolate, hairless (occasionally with a few appressed hairs along the
veins), coarsely toothed, occasionally lobed at the base. Midvein slightly depressed above but smaller veins
are nearly flat. Inflorescence a single, long-stalked spherical umbel of 12-22, reaching 1-4" (2,5-10 cm) above
the leaves, the pedicels white. Flowers (spring) white, 4 mm wide, with 5 blunt-tipped, long-elliptic petals and
protruding stamens. Fruit a yellow-green 3-angled pod 5 mm wide, the surface with several ridges.
HABITAT: Rich, moist soil in hardwood or mixed conifer-hardwood forests, especially with white cedar. black
ash, balsam fir, red maple, or yellow birch. Often on the margins of swamps, in depressions in wooded areas.
or at the base of tree trunks. Native.
FOOD USE: In a dense colony select a few of
the larger roots. These are available all year but
are easiest to find when the tops are present.
They are slightly sweet, aromatic, and pleasant
to nibble raw but better cooked. Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: This beautiful and delicate plant
has thus far been spared the fate of its close
relatives in North America and Asia; hopefully
it will never develop a reputation as a medici-
nal. Dwarf ginseng's root is very different in
form than the commercial ginsengs and is also
much smaller.
BABAL LEAVES AUSENT,LEAVES WHOREED 9 Dwarf ginseng 2 Panax trifolius Araliaceae (Ginseng family) QUICK CHECK: Small herb with a single whorl of 3 compound leaves, each with .ssile leaflets; one central umbel of tiny white flowers. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial spring ephemeral from an enlarged spherical tuber 0.2-0.6" (5-15 mm) in diameter, typically 2-4" (5-10 underground. Stems 3-9' (8-23 cm) tall and 1-3 mm thick, single, erect, unbranched, rounded, smooth, and hairless. Leaves in a single whorl of 3 (rarely 4), each palmately compound with 3-5 (more often 3) sessile leaflets. Petioles reddish, channeled, 60-80% of the terminal leaflet's length. Leaflets 0.5-2.5" (13-65 mm) long, elliptic or oval to lanceolate, hairless (occasionally with a few appressed hairs along the veins), coarsely toothed, occasionally lobed at the base. Midvein slightly depressed above but smaller veins are nearly flat. Inflorescence a single, long-stalked spherical umbel of 12-22, reaching 1-4" (2,5-10 cm) above the leaves, the pedicels white. Flowers (spring) white, 4 mm wide, with 5 blunt-tipped, long-elliptic petals and protruding stamens. Fruit a yellow-green 3-angled pod 5 mm wide, the surface with several ridges. HABITAT: Rich, moist soil in hardwood or mixed conifer-hardwood forests, especially with white cedar. black ash, balsam fir, red maple, or yellow birch. Often on the margins of swamps, in depressions in wooded areas. or at the base of tree trunks. Native. FOOD USE: In a dense colony select a few of the larger roots. These are available all year but are easiest to find when the tops are present. They are slightly sweet, aromatic, and pleasant to nibble raw but better cooked. Conservation 3. COMMENTS: This beautiful and delicate plant has thus far been spared the fate of its close relatives in North America and Asia; hopefully it will never develop a reputation as a medici- nal. Dwarf ginseng's root is very different in form than the commercial ginsengs and is also much smaller. 