10 American ginseng
1
Panax quinquefolia
Araliaceae (Ginseng family)
CHECK: Shin-high, single-stemmed herb with a single whorl difficulty of palmately 2. com-
pound QUICK leaves and an umbel rising out of the center; berries red. ID
Perennial. Taproot enlarged, often forked, whitish inside and hairless. out.
DESCRIPTION: erect, to 22" (56 cm) tall and 5 mm thick, round, smooth, solid, of them
Leaves Stem single, in a whorl of usually 3 or 4. each palmately compound with 5 leaflets, 2 leaflets
small, the center leaflet largest. Petioles channeled, up to 1.5" (4 cm) long;
very are on short petiolules 2-12% of blade length. Leaflets 1.5-6" (4-15 cm) long, obovate with acuminate tips and
rounded bases, the blades flat, thin, hairless, with a metallic gray sheen below; the margins regularly toothed.
Veins depressed above and protruding below, not offset by color; secondary veins at 35-45°. Inflorescence a
spherical, compact umbel of 8-40 flowers that rises from the center of the whorl on an erect peduncle but
usually does not overtop the leaves. Flowers (early to mid summer) 2-3 mm across with 5 petals, whitish or
yellowish green. Fruit (late summer) elliptic but slightly flattened laterally, ripening to red (when green they
are faintly ribbed and much more flattened), to 8 mm in the widest dimension, usually containing 2 seeds.
The pedicel is attached to the flat edge on a longer side.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Wild sarsaparilla Aralia nudicaulis (p. 290) is related and looks remarkably similar
but the flowers and fruit are on a separate, leafless stem and the berries ripen to black.
HABITAT: Mixed hardwood forests with well-drained but rich soil, especially oak-hickory stands casting
only moderate shade. Native.
FOOD USE: Roots can be eaten raw or cooked; gather in autumn. Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: Many wild populations of ginseng have been exterminated by commercial collectors, and
most remaining populations are planted and tended by harvesters. Collecting generally requires a license
a food. They are rather bitter, but not terrible.
and practices are regulated. The primary use is medicinal, but the roots can also be eaten in moderation as
512
10 American ginseng 1 Panax quinquefolia Araliaceae (Ginseng family) CHECK: Shin-high, single-stemmed herb with a single whorl difficulty of palmately 2. com- pound QUICK leaves and an umbel rising out of the center; berries red. ID Perennial. Taproot enlarged, often forked, whitish inside and hairless. out. DESCRIPTION: erect, to 22" (56 cm) tall and 5 mm thick, round, smooth, solid, of them Leaves Stem single, in a whorl of usually 3 or 4. each palmately compound with 5 leaflets, 2 leaflets small, the center leaflet largest. Petioles channeled, up to 1.5" (4 cm) long; very are on short petiolules 2-12% of blade length. Leaflets 1.5-6" (4-15 cm) long, obovate with acuminate tips and rounded bases, the blades flat, thin, hairless, with a metallic gray sheen below; the margins regularly toothed. Veins depressed above and protruding below, not offset by color; secondary veins at 35-45°. Inflorescence a spherical, compact umbel of 8-40 flowers that rises from the center of the whorl on an erect peduncle but usually does not overtop the leaves. Flowers (early to mid summer) 2-3 mm across with 5 petals, whitish or yellowish green. Fruit (late summer) elliptic but slightly flattened laterally, ripening to red (when green they are faintly ribbed and much more flattened), to 8 mm in the widest dimension, usually containing 2 seeds. The pedicel is attached to the flat edge on a longer side. CONFUSING PLANTS: Wild sarsaparilla Aralia nudicaulis (p. 290) is related and looks remarkably similar but the flowers and fruit are on a separate, leafless stem and the berries ripen to black. HABITAT: Mixed hardwood forests with well-drained but rich soil, especially oak-hickory stands casting only moderate shade. Native. FOOD USE: Roots can be eaten raw or cooked; gather in autumn. Conservation 3. COMMENTS: Many wild populations of ginseng have been exterminated by commercial collectors, and most remaining populations are planted and tended by harvesters. Collecting generally requires a license a food. They are rather bitter, but not terrible. and practices are regulated. The primary use is medicinal, but the roots can also be eaten in moderation as 512 