inceoe
1cm
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED,
STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC
GROUP 31 BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED,
STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC
The plants in group 31 all belong to the mint family, Lamiaceae. Their repertoire of food uses
is small-primarily as flavorings-but mints are well-known and popular among foragers
Many species are cultivated. This is one of the easiest and safest groups for beginners.
The most problematic part of this key is that variable leaf form occasionally results in
an atypical specimen having toothed or entire leaves in defiance of its species' norm.
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 31
The key is not your final answer!
Most leaves entire or nearly so (margins may be wavy or gland-dotted).
Leaves narrowly lanceolate to almost linear.
Ankle to shin-high; a few purple flowers in most leaf axils.
1. Calamint
or
Thigh to waist high; small terminal clusters of whitish flowers.
2. Virginia mountain mint
Leaves lanceolate or broader; definitely not linear.
Generally less than 18" (45 cm) tall; calyces green.
Flowers in most axils; leaf hairless above, finely dotted.
4. American pennyroyal
or
Flowers in a few axils; leaf soft-hairy above, not dotted.
5. Wild basil
2-4' (60-120 cm) tall; terminal flower clusters with purple bracts and calyces.
6. Oregano
Most leaves distinctly toothed (although the teeth may be few and distant of rounded).
7. Dittany
Stem erect and woody at the base; shrub-like.
1. Calamint
Stem creeping with overlapping, leathery, evergreen leaves.
Stem erect and herbaceous.
Stem hairless.
8. Anise hyssop
Flowers almost regular with 4 nearly equal lobes.
12. Mint
or
Flowers clearly irregular, with 4 very unequal lobes or diverging lips.
Stem hairy (although the hairs may be tiny, woolly, or confined to the corners).
Leaf very rough-corrugated by many deeply depressed veinlets.
9. Horehound
Flowers in rounded clusters above drooping pairs of stem leaves.
10. Catnip
or
Flowers in terminal spike- or panicle-like clusters.
Leaf with secondary veins depressed but veinlets less SO or not at all.
11. Shiso
Stem corners rounded; all 4 sides deeply and narrowly grooved.
Stem corners not rounded; sides flat, convex, or concave but not deeply 4-grooved.
12. Mint
Flowers almost regular with 4 nearly equal lobes.
Flowers clearly irregular, with 4 very unequal lobes or 2 diverging lips.
14. Creeping charlie
Flowers in one-sided clusters of a few from leaf axils.
or
Flowers in dense, stacked clusters of many.
Clusters separated, with whorls of many bracts longer than the flowers:
15. Horsemint
or
flowers Clusters mostly crammed together. with whorls of bracts shorter than
15-30 mm long.
13. Tall woodmint
the flowers; flowers 8-12 mm long.
Flowers mostly or only In dense terminal clusters.
3. Broad-leaved mountain mint
Flowers 4-8 mm long with 4 unequal lobes.
16. Bergamot
Flowers 20-40 mm long with 2 long, narrow, diverging lips.
as
inceoe 1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED, STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC GROUP 31 BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED, STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC The plants in group 31 all belong to the mint family, Lamiaceae. Their repertoire of food uses is small-primarily as flavorings-but mints are well-known and popular among foragers Many species are cultivated. This is one of the easiest and safest groups for beginners. The most problematic part of this key is that variable leaf form occasionally results in an atypical specimen having toothed or entire leaves in defiance of its species' norm. TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 31 The key is not your final answer! Most leaves entire or nearly so (margins may be wavy or gland-dotted). Leaves narrowly lanceolate to almost linear. Ankle to shin-high; a few purple flowers in most leaf axils. 1. Calamint or Thigh to waist high; small terminal clusters of whitish flowers. 2. Virginia mountain mint Leaves lanceolate or broader; definitely not linear. Generally less than 18" (45 cm) tall; calyces green. Flowers in most axils; leaf hairless above, finely dotted. 4. American pennyroyal or Flowers in a few axils; leaf soft-hairy above, not dotted. 5. Wild basil 2-4' (60-120 cm) tall; terminal flower clusters with purple bracts and calyces. 6. Oregano Most leaves distinctly toothed (although the teeth may be few and distant of rounded). 7. Dittany Stem erect and woody at the base; shrub-like. 1. Calamint Stem creeping with overlapping, leathery, evergreen leaves. Stem erect and herbaceous. Stem hairless. 8. Anise hyssop Flowers almost regular with 4 nearly equal lobes. 12. Mint or Flowers clearly irregular, with 4 very unequal lobes or diverging lips. Stem hairy (although the hairs may be tiny, woolly, or confined to the corners). Leaf very rough-corrugated by many deeply depressed veinlets. 9. Horehound Flowers in rounded clusters above drooping pairs of stem leaves. 10. Catnip or Flowers in terminal spike- or panicle-like clusters. Leaf with secondary veins depressed but veinlets less SO or not at all. 11. Shiso Stem corners rounded; all 4 sides deeply and narrowly grooved. Stem corners not rounded; sides flat, convex, or concave but not deeply 4-grooved. 12. Mint Flowers almost regular with 4 nearly equal lobes. Flowers clearly irregular, with 4 very unequal lobes or 2 diverging lips. 14. Creeping charlie Flowers in one-sided clusters of a few from leaf axils. or Flowers in dense, stacked clusters of many. Clusters separated, with whorls of many bracts longer than the flowers: 15. Horsemint or flowers Clusters mostly crammed together. with whorls of bracts shorter than 15-30 mm long. 13. Tall woodmint the flowers; flowers 8-12 mm long. Flowers mostly or only In dense terminal clusters. 3. Broad-leaved mountain mint Flowers 4-8 mm long with 4 unequal lobes. 16. Bergamot Flowers 20-40 mm long with 2 long, narrow, diverging lips. as 