0
1cm
BASAL STEMS
2 Virginia Pycnanthemum mountain mint
LEAVESABED.M.LEAVES.PATIC
virginianum
QUICK iry ridges; CHECK: flowers Aromatic packed mint into with terminal very narrow, clusters. entire, Lamiaceae ID sessile leavas (Mint and family)
DESCRIPTION: wide. Stems Clumped perennial herb from short rhizomes, difficulty 1.
not concave, 1.5-3.5' (45-110 cm) tall and 3-5 mm thick, the form much taller than
the upper part. becoming LYDS tough and rigid and very dark at maturity, hairy primarily with on the angles, the sides
near branch tips, sessile prominent, or on very top short, clusters upturned retaining some scent. ascending Leaves sparse. branches on mature in plants
0.8-2.5" on both sides. (2-6 cm) Midvein long, depressed sharp-pointed, above hairless above petioles. but hairy The blades on the are veins entire, beneath; long-elliptic dark to nearly clustered linear
color, depressed and protruding below. dots are usible
levels of 3-way branching, or flat above. Margins in entire, strongly downcurved. Secondary Inflorescence veins few. terminal nearly parallel light n
hairy bracts, with ending dense clusters 10-12 mm wide subtended with multiple
5 mm long, the corolla only white a few of the flowers open at any time-these oriented by skyward. a wharl Flowers of numerous summer) very -
with purple speckles, 2-lipped, the lower lip with 3 lobes.
HABITAT: Native. Sunny areas, both moist and dry, Marsh edges, wet meadows, prairies, bases of limestone bluffs
FOOD as USE: Gather leaves and young stems throughout the growing season to use fresh or dried for tea or
a flavoring. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This widespread species apparently has 2 chemotypes: some populations taste like
others like bergamot. Narrow-leaf mountain mint P. tenuifolia is very similar in appearance, with even mint narrower and
leaves, but it has little minty scent.
Shoot.
3 Broad-leaved mountain mints
genus Pycnanthemum (in part)
Lamiaceae (Mint family)
QUICK CHECK: Waist to chest-high colonial, erect, branchy musts with sparsely wathes often whitish
leaves and tiny irregular flowers in packed terminal clusters ID difficulty 1.
in colonies spreading by rhizome Scent minty or monarda-like. Stems ovate erect to
DESCRIPTION: Perennials thin in proportion to their height, branchy. Leaves paired, sessile silvery-white. or nearly SO. Surfaces
2.5-6' (75-180 cm) tall, to an acute tip, 2-3.5" (5-9 cm) long, the upper leaves less so. often Margins with scattered
narrowly lanceolate, tapered glossy. Midvein depressed; secondary veins flat to faintly
faintly widely-spaced, to strongly small, hairy, blunt not teeth (occasionally entire). Petioles 10-30% of blade length, above
channeled. (Continued on the next page.)
515
0 1cm BASAL STEMS 2 Virginia Pycnanthemum mountain mint LEAVESABED.M.LEAVES.PATIC virginianum QUICK iry ridges; CHECK: flowers Aromatic packed mint into with terminal very narrow, clusters. entire, Lamiaceae ID sessile leavas (Mint and family) DESCRIPTION: wide. Stems Clumped perennial herb from short rhizomes, difficulty 1. not concave, 1.5-3.5' (45-110 cm) tall and 3-5 mm thick, the form much taller than the upper part. becoming LYDS tough and rigid and very dark at maturity, hairy primarily with on the angles, the sides near branch tips, sessile prominent, or on very top short, clusters upturned retaining some scent. ascending Leaves sparse. branches on mature in plants 0.8-2.5" on both sides. (2-6 cm) Midvein long, depressed sharp-pointed, above hairless above petioles. but hairy The blades on the are veins entire, beneath; long-elliptic dark to nearly clustered linear color, depressed and protruding below. dots are usible levels of 3-way branching, or flat above. Margins in entire, strongly downcurved. Secondary Inflorescence veins few. terminal nearly parallel light n hairy bracts, with ending dense clusters 10-12 mm wide subtended with multiple 5 mm long, the corolla only white a few of the flowers open at any time-these oriented by skyward. a wharl Flowers of numerous summer) very - with purple speckles, 2-lipped, the lower lip with 3 lobes. HABITAT: Native. Sunny areas, both moist and dry, Marsh edges, wet meadows, prairies, bases of limestone bluffs FOOD as USE: Gather leaves and young stems throughout the growing season to use fresh or dried for tea or a flavoring. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This widespread species apparently has 2 chemotypes: some populations taste like others like bergamot. Narrow-leaf mountain mint P. tenuifolia is very similar in appearance, with even mint narrower and leaves, but it has little minty scent. Shoot. 3 Broad-leaved mountain mints genus Pycnanthemum (in part) Lamiaceae (Mint family) QUICK CHECK: Waist to chest-high colonial, erect, branchy musts with sparsely wathes often whitish leaves and tiny irregular flowers in packed terminal clusters ID difficulty 1. in colonies spreading by rhizome Scent minty or monarda-like. Stems ovate erect to DESCRIPTION: Perennials thin in proportion to their height, branchy. Leaves paired, sessile silvery-white. or nearly SO. Surfaces 2.5-6' (75-180 cm) tall, to an acute tip, 2-3.5" (5-9 cm) long, the upper leaves less so. often Margins with scattered narrowly lanceolate, tapered glossy. Midvein depressed; secondary veins flat to faintly faintly widely-spaced, to strongly small, hairy, blunt not teeth (occasionally entire). Petioles 10-30% of blade length, above channeled. (Continued on the next page.) 515 