BASAL SEAVES ABSENT,LEAVES,ATED
STEMS
Calamint
Calamintha
arkansana
Lamiaceae
(Mint
family)
QUICK CHECK: Intensely aromatic mint. creeping or short and bushy, with thin stems
small, tough leaves. ID difficulty 1.
and very perennial mint with distinctly different flowering and and non-flowering evergreen,
DESCRIPTION: Low Non-flowering stems form in late summer the are nodes, with
stems. forming colonies. ground, 4-7" (10-18 cm) long, squared and rooting at (of creeping
few to no branches paired, nearly sessile, thick and fleshy or slightly tough but flexible, 3-10 both mm sides long, hairless broadly and
creeping along the and the leaves crowded and often overlapping. Leaves
stems) evergreen, with blunt to rounded tips, the blades slightly creased along the midvein, teeth in the distal
oval to obovate often purplish above, light in color below. Margins entire or with a few blade quarter. Flower-
Midvein finely dotted, depressed above and flat below; secondary veins obscure. Petioles 40-100% of length.
ing stems form in spring, usually multiple, erect or ascending, 4-14" (10-36 tall and 1-2 mm thick, branchy,
squared, the angles faintly winged, hairless except sometimes
at the nodes. Leaves (of flowering stems) paired, sessile or
nearly so, 8-12 mm long, often with a tuft of smaller leaves in
the axil, hairless, linear to narrowly oblanceolate, tapered to
the base, entire (rarely with a few teeth), the tip usually blunt,
with no prominent secondary veins. Inflorescence small clusters
of 1-7 per leaf axil, the pedicels 2-10 mm long. Flowers (sum-
mer) 1 cm long, tubular, the 5-lobed calyx almost symmetrical.
Corolla whitish to pink-purple, hairy, tubular, much longer than
the calyx, with 4 lobes of about equal length, the upper one
broader, shallowly notched, and recurved.
HABITAT: Harsh, sunny, rocky sites with poor, thin, limestone-
derived soil-especially where rock prevents water percolation.
Ridges and ledges, dry glades and hilltop openings, open shores
of large lakes. Spottily distributed due to very specific habitat
needs, but locally abundant.
FOOD USE: The leaves can be used as a tea or seasoning,
fresh or dried. The overwintering leaves are too tough for
food, but the sprouts of the erect stems in spring are tender.
Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This remarkably potent herb is our strongest
smelling mint and has caused many hikers to pause and look
under their feet. Calamint is probably my favorite mint for
tea. The taxonomy of these plants is very confusing; they are
and considered two species or one, depending on the authority,
the can go by several scientific names besides the one listed in
Saturejo glabella, Chnopodium glabellum.
heading. AKA Clinopodium arkansanum, Satureja arkansana,
kreeping interstem
BASAL SEAVES ABSENT,LEAVES,ATED STEMS Calamint Calamintha arkansana Lamiaceae (Mint family) QUICK CHECK: Intensely aromatic mint. creeping or short and bushy, with thin stems small, tough leaves. ID difficulty 1. and very perennial mint with distinctly different flowering and and non-flowering evergreen, DESCRIPTION: Low Non-flowering stems form in late summer the are nodes, with stems. forming colonies. ground, 4-7" (10-18 cm) long, squared and rooting at (of creeping few to no branches paired, nearly sessile, thick and fleshy or slightly tough but flexible, 3-10 both mm sides long, hairless broadly and creeping along the and the leaves crowded and often overlapping. Leaves stems) evergreen, with blunt to rounded tips, the blades slightly creased along the midvein, teeth in the distal oval to obovate often purplish above, light in color below. Margins entire or with a few blade quarter. Flower- Midvein finely dotted, depressed above and flat below; secondary veins obscure. Petioles 40-100% of length. ing stems form in spring, usually multiple, erect or ascending, 4-14" (10-36 tall and 1-2 mm thick, branchy, squared, the angles faintly winged, hairless except sometimes at the nodes. Leaves (of flowering stems) paired, sessile or nearly so, 8-12 mm long, often with a tuft of smaller leaves in the axil, hairless, linear to narrowly oblanceolate, tapered to the base, entire (rarely with a few teeth), the tip usually blunt, with no prominent secondary veins. Inflorescence small clusters of 1-7 per leaf axil, the pedicels 2-10 mm long. Flowers (sum- mer) 1 cm long, tubular, the 5-lobed calyx almost symmetrical. Corolla whitish to pink-purple, hairy, tubular, much longer than the calyx, with 4 lobes of about equal length, the upper one broader, shallowly notched, and recurved. HABITAT: Harsh, sunny, rocky sites with poor, thin, limestone- derived soil-especially where rock prevents water percolation. Ridges and ledges, dry glades and hilltop openings, open shores of large lakes. Spottily distributed due to very specific habitat needs, but locally abundant. FOOD USE: The leaves can be used as a tea or seasoning, fresh or dried. The overwintering leaves are too tough for food, but the sprouts of the erect stems in spring are tender. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This remarkably potent herb is our strongest smelling mint and has caused many hikers to pause and look under their feet. Calamint is probably my favorite mint for tea. The taxonomy of these plants is very confusing; they are and considered two species or one, depending on the authority, the can go by several scientific names besides the one listed in Saturejo glabella, Chnopodium glabellum. heading. AKA Clinopodium arkansanum, Satureja arkansana, kreeping interstem 