mm
0
1cm
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED,
STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC
4
American pennyroyal
Hedeoma pulegioides
Lamiaceae (Mint family)
QUICK CHECK: Low, tiny mint with small, well-spaced leaves, entire OF with a FAM large
teeth, and tiny flowers in most axils. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Small annual. Stems single, erect or leaning, 6-15" (15-38 cm) tall and
1-3 mm thick, squared, densely covered with fine hair, unbranched or with a few ascending
branches mostly in the middle third. Leaves in well-spaced pairs, often with a tuft of smaller
leaves in the axil, the members of the pair of ten unequal in size, lanceolate to elliptic, 0.3-0.8"
(8-20 mm) long, acute at both ends, the tip often blunt, Blade flat, dotted, hairless on top but with sparse. fine
hairs below. A few major veins are depressed above and protruding below, but veinlets are obscure. Mar-
gins entire or with a few scattered, large teeth. Petioles 20% of blade length. Inflorescence clusters of 2-12 in
most or all leaf axils, each cluster with a pair of miniature leaves beneath it. The pedicel is about half the length
of the calyx. Flowers (summer) irregular, 5-7 mm long. Calyx highly irregular, bulged on the bottom, a curved
green tube with prominent raised
ridges supporting a row of stiff
hooked hairs. The tip is 5-lobed;
the top 3 lobes are recurved.
triangular, and sharp, while the
bottom 2 are narrower, curved
upward with stiff bristles-like
a pair of pinchers on a beetle.
Corolla whitish to light blue
or purple (usually a mottled
mixture of these colors), about
as long as the calyx, tubular.
the end 2-lipped, the lower lip
smaller with 3 broad lobes.
Seeds four, brown, in the base
of the calyx tube.
HABITAT: Open or semi-open
sites with a long-term trend of,
but not necessarily immedi-
ate, disturbance. Dry or open
woods, savannahs, forest open-
ings, pastures, hillside prairies,
roadsides, trails through woods.
Mostly on limestone. Native. A
FOOD USE: Collect leaves and
use dry or fresh for tea. Conser-
vation 2.
COMMENTS: One of our
strongest mints, this species
has been grown commercially
for the flavoring extracted
from it. The present species IS
not the same as the true pen-
hyroyal Mentha pulegrum. an
Old-World mint. AKA false
pennyroyal. Hedeoma hispidals
lose relative with long, harr
FOW entire leaves and a raspier
texture; it has little scent. It is
native to dry fields and
with poor, sandy soil.
517
mm 0 1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED, STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC 4 American pennyroyal Hedeoma pulegioides Lamiaceae (Mint family) QUICK CHECK: Low, tiny mint with small, well-spaced leaves, entire OF with a FAM large teeth, and tiny flowers in most axils. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Small annual. Stems single, erect or leaning, 6-15" (15-38 cm) tall and 1-3 mm thick, squared, densely covered with fine hair, unbranched or with a few ascending branches mostly in the middle third. Leaves in well-spaced pairs, often with a tuft of smaller leaves in the axil, the members of the pair of ten unequal in size, lanceolate to elliptic, 0.3-0.8" (8-20 mm) long, acute at both ends, the tip often blunt, Blade flat, dotted, hairless on top but with sparse. fine hairs below. A few major veins are depressed above and protruding below, but veinlets are obscure. Mar- gins entire or with a few scattered, large teeth. Petioles 20% of blade length. Inflorescence clusters of 2-12 in most or all leaf axils, each cluster with a pair of miniature leaves beneath it. The pedicel is about half the length of the calyx. Flowers (summer) irregular, 5-7 mm long. Calyx highly irregular, bulged on the bottom, a curved green tube with prominent raised ridges supporting a row of stiff hooked hairs. The tip is 5-lobed; the top 3 lobes are recurved. triangular, and sharp, while the bottom 2 are narrower, curved upward with stiff bristles-like a pair of pinchers on a beetle. Corolla whitish to light blue or purple (usually a mottled mixture of these colors), about as long as the calyx, tubular. the end 2-lipped, the lower lip smaller with 3 broad lobes. Seeds four, brown, in the base of the calyx tube. HABITAT: Open or semi-open sites with a long-term trend of, but not necessarily immedi- ate, disturbance. Dry or open woods, savannahs, forest open- ings, pastures, hillside prairies, roadsides, trails through woods. Mostly on limestone. Native. A FOOD USE: Collect leaves and use dry or fresh for tea. Conser- vation 2. COMMENTS: One of our strongest mints, this species has been grown commercially for the flavoring extracted from it. The present species IS not the same as the true pen- hyroyal Mentha pulegrum. an Old-World mint. AKA false pennyroyal. Hedeoma hispidals lose relative with long, harr FOW entire leaves and a raspier texture; it has little scent. It is native to dry fields and with poor, sandy soil. 517 