STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED,
Broad-leaved mountain mints (continued)
dense terminal clusters (also sometimes in the uppermost beneath axils), the cluster. round-
Inflorescence elongated or spike-like -with reduced leaves The calyx has
topped to flat : never verv small. 4-8 mm long, with 4 protruding stamens. well beyond the
Flowers pointed (summer) lobes Corolla whitish with purple to pinkish spots, protruding
calvx. 4 irregular with 4 lobes, the top one usually strongly recurved.
HABITAT: Mostly open or young forests, savannahs, and forest edges. All species native.
Collective rar
FOOD USE: Used like other mints for tea or seasoning, fresh or dried. Conservation 2.
of broad-leav
mountain min
COMMENTS: Mountain mints are not as well-known as the mints of the genus Mentha;
however, many are highly aromatic and good for the same uses. There are several similar species in our ar
that I have lumped together for discussion, but they do not all taste the same-some are more like mint
like bergamot. A few examples are pictured below.
a
(above) Pycnanthemum muticum has broad leaves with the
vers flat on the upper surface and tends to grow in dense
colonies. (right) Pycnanthemum incanum has lanceolate
leaver the upper ones whitened.
(left) (above) Pycnanthemum verticillatum
leaves Pycnanthemum verticillatum has flowers.
leaves are and not small whitened. heads of small flowers; lanceolate the upper
STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED, Broad-leaved mountain mints (continued) dense terminal clusters (also sometimes in the uppermost beneath axils), the cluster. round- Inflorescence elongated or spike-like -with reduced leaves The calyx has topped to flat : never verv small. 4-8 mm long, with 4 protruding stamens. well beyond the Flowers pointed (summer) lobes Corolla whitish with purple to pinkish spots, protruding calvx. 4 irregular with 4 lobes, the top one usually strongly recurved. HABITAT: Mostly open or young forests, savannahs, and forest edges. All species native. Collective rar FOOD USE: Used like other mints for tea or seasoning, fresh or dried. Conservation 2. of broad-leav mountain min COMMENTS: Mountain mints are not as well-known as the mints of the genus Mentha; however, many are highly aromatic and good for the same uses. There are several similar species in our ar that I have lumped together for discussion, but they do not all taste the same-some are more like mint like bergamot. A few examples are pictured below. a (above) Pycnanthemum muticum has broad leaves with the vers flat on the upper surface and tends to grow in dense colonies. (right) Pycnanthemum incanum has lanceolate leaver the upper ones whitened. (left) (above) Pycnanthemum verticillatum leaves Pycnanthemum verticillatum has flowers. leaves are and not small whitened. heads of small flowers; lanceolate the upper 