BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED,
STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC
Wild basil
Satureja vulgaris 4 Lamiaceae (Mint family)
QUICK CHEC K: Shor (, chimped mint, soft-hairy all over, with ovate, blunt-tipped leaves
with wavy edges ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from creeping, rooting, semi-woody stems on the surface,
the erect stems usually in small groups. Stems 6-20" (15-50 cm) tall and 1-2 mm wide,
erect but weak, often leaning on other plants, simple or with a few branches, squared,
the surface covered with fine, soft hair. There is often a long naked section between the
miniature lower leaves and the upper ones. Leaves paired, 0.7-2.5" (18-64 mm) long (tiny on the lower stem),
ovate to elliptic, the bases rounded, the tips blunt to rounded, acutely angled (at least on larger leaves). Blades
are thin and delicate, soft-hairy on both sides (denser below). Midvein deeply depressed above. Secondary
veins 4-6 per side, arching, deeply depressed above; veinlets mostly obscure. Margins entire to wavy or with
broad, shallow, rounded teeth. Petioles flat on top, 80% of blade length on lower leaves, shortening to 5% on
the upper ones. Inflorescence tight clusters in a few upper leaf axils, the pedicels 1-5 mm. Flowers (summer)
0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm) long, the calyx 2-lipped, with long, pointed, hairy lobes. The corolla is pink-purple with 2 lips,
the lower one much broader and 3-lobed.
HABITAT: Open woodlands, forest borders, clearings, fields, disturbed sites in woods; in heavy shade to full
sun, but preferring dry soil. Native.
FOOD USE: Young greens in spring can be used as a slightly aromatic herb, sort of like a lame version of
basil. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: The taste is better than the aftertaste, which is bitter and not pleasant. This mint is barely
good enough to include in this book, but since it is called "wild basil" and is extremely common, people often
wonder and ask about it. AKA dog mint (as if dogs are really into bad basil), Clinopodium vulgare.
578
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED, STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC Wild basil Satureja vulgaris 4 Lamiaceae (Mint family) QUICK CHEC K: Shor (, chimped mint, soft-hairy all over, with ovate, blunt-tipped leaves with wavy edges ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from creeping, rooting, semi-woody stems on the surface, the erect stems usually in small groups. Stems 6-20" (15-50 cm) tall and 1-2 mm wide, erect but weak, often leaning on other plants, simple or with a few branches, squared, the surface covered with fine, soft hair. There is often a long naked section between the miniature lower leaves and the upper ones. Leaves paired, 0.7-2.5" (18-64 mm) long (tiny on the lower stem), ovate to elliptic, the bases rounded, the tips blunt to rounded, acutely angled (at least on larger leaves). Blades are thin and delicate, soft-hairy on both sides (denser below). Midvein deeply depressed above. Secondary veins 4-6 per side, arching, deeply depressed above; veinlets mostly obscure. Margins entire to wavy or with broad, shallow, rounded teeth. Petioles flat on top, 80% of blade length on lower leaves, shortening to 5% on the upper ones. Inflorescence tight clusters in a few upper leaf axils, the pedicels 1-5 mm. Flowers (summer) 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm) long, the calyx 2-lipped, with long, pointed, hairy lobes. The corolla is pink-purple with 2 lips, the lower one much broader and 3-lobed. HABITAT: Open woodlands, forest borders, clearings, fields, disturbed sites in woods; in heavy shade to full sun, but preferring dry soil. Native. FOOD USE: Young greens in spring can be used as a slightly aromatic herb, sort of like a lame version of basil. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: The taste is better than the aftertaste, which is bitter and not pleasant. This mint is barely good enough to include in this book, but since it is called "wild basil" and is extremely common, people often wonder and ask about it. AKA dog mint (as if dogs are really into bad basil), Clinopodium vulgare. 578 