1cm
BASAL STEMS LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED,
SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC
6 Oregano II
Origanum
vulgare
Lamiaceae
(Mint
family)
QUICK ddish-purple CHECK: Clumped aromatic mint with untoothed leaves
ID 1.
difficulty flowers in dense terminal clusters at the ends on of tri-farked short patioles, branches imail
DESCRIPTION: leaves; Clump-forming perennial herb from tough, creeping surface
tiny tall, these stems eventually turn erect and thicken. Erect stems 12-32 stems with
cially on shoots); hairs near the base point downward. The lower stems are often (espe-
purplish (especially near nodes), squared but with the corners often blunt, hairy (30-80 cm)
for 2 internodes after turning erect. There are short branches in most axils, even near twisted the
base, but the form is taller than wide. Leaves paired, ovate to elliptic, 0.6-1.5" (15-38 mm)
The wild range
of this plant is
long, soft-hairy on both sides, the tips blunt, often downcurved (at least when young).
hard to discern
the margin entire or with a few scat-
because - culti- -
tered purple teeth. Midvein depressed
vated plants are
above and protruding below. Second-
frequently put
into botanical
ary veins few, depressed. Petioles
records.
10-20% of blade length (60-110% on
young shoots). Inflorescence (summer) branches in threes
with a slightly thicker central stem and a pair of lateral
branches at a 45° angle. Each branch terminates in a dense
round or pyramid shaped cluster of purplish bracts from
which the flowers protrude. Corolla purple-red to paie cink
and irregular, tubular with a very narrowed base, hairy, the
end with 2 lips, the upper lip with a shallow notch at the
tip, the lower lip strongly recurved and split into 3 lobes.
Calyx regular, with triangular lobes. LYDS persistent and
often wavy-the inflorescence form remains evident.
HABITAT: Dry, sunny, disturbed ground, mostly on lime-
stone or dolomite. Roadsides, construction sites, gravel
pits and quarries, old fields and pastures. Introduced
FOOD USE: Dried or fresh leaves can be used as a
seasoning.
COMMENTS: This is the domestic herb gone feral. and it
is locally abundant in the right habitat.
519
1cm BASAL STEMS LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED, SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC 6 Oregano II Origanum vulgare Lamiaceae (Mint family) QUICK ddish-purple CHECK: Clumped aromatic mint with untoothed leaves ID 1. difficulty flowers in dense terminal clusters at the ends on of tri-farked short patioles, branches imail DESCRIPTION: leaves; Clump-forming perennial herb from tough, creeping surface tiny tall, these stems eventually turn erect and thicken. Erect stems 12-32 stems with cially on shoots); hairs near the base point downward. The lower stems are often (espe- purplish (especially near nodes), squared but with the corners often blunt, hairy (30-80 cm) for 2 internodes after turning erect. There are short branches in most axils, even near twisted the base, but the form is taller than wide. Leaves paired, ovate to elliptic, 0.6-1.5" (15-38 mm) The wild range of this plant is long, soft-hairy on both sides, the tips blunt, often downcurved (at least when young). hard to discern the margin entire or with a few scat- because - culti- - tered purple teeth. Midvein depressed vated plants are above and protruding below. Second- frequently put into botanical ary veins few, depressed. Petioles records. 10-20% of blade length (60-110% on young shoots). Inflorescence (summer) branches in threes with a slightly thicker central stem and a pair of lateral branches at a 45° angle. Each branch terminates in a dense round or pyramid shaped cluster of purplish bracts from which the flowers protrude. Corolla purple-red to paie cink and irregular, tubular with a very narrowed base, hairy, the end with 2 lips, the upper lip with a shallow notch at the tip, the lower lip strongly recurved and split into 3 lobes. Calyx regular, with triangular lobes. LYDS persistent and often wavy-the inflorescence form remains evident. HABITAT: Dry, sunny, disturbed ground, mostly on lime- stone or dolomite. Roadsides, construction sites, gravel pits and quarries, old fields and pastures. Introduced FOOD USE: Dried or fresh leaves can be used as a seasoning. COMMENTS: This is the domestic herb gone feral. and it is locally abundant in the right habitat. 519 