1cm
BASAL STEMS LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES
8
SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC PAIRED,
Anise hyssop
Agastache foeniculum
Lamiaceae (Mint family)
QUICK flowers, CHECK: and a fennel-like Erect, unbranched aroma. ID mint difficulty with well 1, spaced, tough, glossy leaver
i 2-3.5' ESCRIPTION: (60-110 cm) Perennial from short rhizomes. Stems single or in loose
unbranched below tall, 4-sided, hairless, purple and green, each side colonies, erect,
tufts of smaller the inflorescence. Leaves paired at widely spaced channeled. usually
almost leaves in the axils, lanceolate to ovate, 2-3.5" (5-9 cm) nodes, (often with
leathery. Surface blue-green and somewhat glossy above; paler with long, stiff and
very short, fine (almost invisible), appressed hairs below. Midvein and small dots and
Widely planted
and often feral
are depressed above; secondary veins at a 25-35° angle. Margins have secondary veins
outside the
broad, nipple-tipped teeth. Inflorescence a terminal spike to 7" (18 cm) long, widely-spaced, sometimes
native range
interrupted near the base but very densely packed near the tip. Flowers (late summer) 4-6
the 2-lipped and blue-purple, the lower lip broad and 2-lobed. Sexual parts protrude for-by mm about long, the the length corolia of
corolla. The calyx is green with a symmetrical 5-lobed tip.
HABITAT: Dry fields, prairies, meadows, forest borders, pine and oak barrens. Likes full sun on well-drained
soil, especially sand. Native (but often planted and persisting outside its range). 4
FOOD USE: Gather leaves at any time to use for tea; steep in hot water. May be used fresh or dried. Excellent
mixed with other teas. The tender tips can be used as a seasoning. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This herb is one of our best wild teas, with a strong, distinct, and pleasant flavor that is remi-
niscent of anise or fennel, but better than either (as a drink, at least). In some circles the tea is high y regarded
as a cold remedy.
521
1cm BASAL STEMS LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES 8 SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC PAIRED, Anise hyssop Agastache foeniculum Lamiaceae (Mint family) QUICK flowers, CHECK: and a fennel-like Erect, unbranched aroma. ID mint difficulty with well 1, spaced, tough, glossy leaver i 2-3.5' ESCRIPTION: (60-110 cm) Perennial from short rhizomes. Stems single or in loose unbranched below tall, 4-sided, hairless, purple and green, each side colonies, erect, tufts of smaller the inflorescence. Leaves paired at widely spaced channeled. usually almost leaves in the axils, lanceolate to ovate, 2-3.5" (5-9 cm) nodes, (often with leathery. Surface blue-green and somewhat glossy above; paler with long, stiff and very short, fine (almost invisible), appressed hairs below. Midvein and small dots and Widely planted and often feral are depressed above; secondary veins at a 25-35° angle. Margins have secondary veins outside the broad, nipple-tipped teeth. Inflorescence a terminal spike to 7" (18 cm) long, widely-spaced, sometimes native range interrupted near the base but very densely packed near the tip. Flowers (late summer) 4-6 the 2-lipped and blue-purple, the lower lip broad and 2-lobed. Sexual parts protrude for-by mm about long, the the length corolia of corolla. The calyx is green with a symmetrical 5-lobed tip. HABITAT: Dry fields, prairies, meadows, forest borders, pine and oak barrens. Likes full sun on well-drained soil, especially sand. Native (but often planted and persisting outside its range). 4 FOOD USE: Gather leaves at any time to use for tea; steep in hot water. May be used fresh or dried. Excellent mixed with other teas. The tender tips can be used as a seasoning. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This herb is one of our best wild teas, with a strong, distinct, and pleasant flavor that is remi- niscent of anise or fennel, but better than either (as a drink, at least). In some circles the tea is high y regarded as a cold remedy. 521 