BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED,
STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC
Cunila Dittany origanoides Lamiaceae (Mint family)
QUICK CHECK: Bush-like, branchy mint with wiry stems; leaves toothed and nearly
sessile, the veins light and not depressed above. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial quasi-shrub from a woody base. Stems one to several, in close
proximity but not tightly clumped, erect to leaning or spreading. up to 24 (60 cm) tall and
2-3 mm thick, pithy, stiff and tough, purplish, squared, with scattered long. soft hairs. There
are many prominent branches beginning in the lower quarter, these ascending and almost
equaling the stem. Leaves paired, nearly sessile. ovate, 0.7-1,6" (18-40 mm) long, paler beneath, rounded at
the base with an acute, sharp-pointed tip. Surface bumpy above and dark-dotted below with scattered long
hairs, especially on the midvein. Margins have small, sharp, widely spaced. forward-pointing teeth; rarely
they are entire. Veins are lighter than the blade above and not depressed; they are darker than the blade below.
Secondary veins are numerous, at acute angles. Inflorescence small paired. stalked. branching clusters of 3 11
from upper leaf axils and the
stem tip; tiny linear bracts are
mingled with the flowers.
Flowers (mid summer to
fall) 5 mm long, the corolla an
elongated light purplish tube
with 2 lips, the upper lip shal-
lowly 2-lobed, the lower lip
reflexed and deeply 3-lobed.
The filaments extend far
beyond the lips. The tubular.
striped calyx has 5 regular,
triangular lobes.
HABITAT: Dry, open forests,
rocky barrens and outcrops,
ledges, oak savannahs, sandy
prairies, roadsides in wooded
areas, abandoned fields
and pastures, steep banks.
Native.
FOOD USE: Use leaves fresh
or dried for a tea or season-
ing. The taste is reminiscent
of oregano or bergamot. Con-
servation 2.
COMMENTS: This plant
sometimes produces "frost
flowers" in late autumn; as
the roots push sap out of the
broken vascular tissues, the
sap freezes in thin sheets,
curling around in layers to
form erratic and beauti-
ful formations (Frostweed
Verbesing virginica is more
famous for these ice ribbon
structures., wild AKA stone mint,
oregano.
520
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED, STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC Cunila Dittany origanoides Lamiaceae (Mint family) QUICK CHECK: Bush-like, branchy mint with wiry stems; leaves toothed and nearly sessile, the veins light and not depressed above. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial quasi-shrub from a woody base. Stems one to several, in close proximity but not tightly clumped, erect to leaning or spreading. up to 24 (60 cm) tall and 2-3 mm thick, pithy, stiff and tough, purplish, squared, with scattered long. soft hairs. There are many prominent branches beginning in the lower quarter, these ascending and almost equaling the stem. Leaves paired, nearly sessile. ovate, 0.7-1,6" (18-40 mm) long, paler beneath, rounded at the base with an acute, sharp-pointed tip. Surface bumpy above and dark-dotted below with scattered long hairs, especially on the midvein. Margins have small, sharp, widely spaced. forward-pointing teeth; rarely they are entire. Veins are lighter than the blade above and not depressed; they are darker than the blade below. Secondary veins are numerous, at acute angles. Inflorescence small paired. stalked. branching clusters of 3 11 from upper leaf axils and the stem tip; tiny linear bracts are mingled with the flowers. Flowers (mid summer to fall) 5 mm long, the corolla an elongated light purplish tube with 2 lips, the upper lip shal- lowly 2-lobed, the lower lip reflexed and deeply 3-lobed. The filaments extend far beyond the lips. The tubular. striped calyx has 5 regular, triangular lobes. HABITAT: Dry, open forests, rocky barrens and outcrops, ledges, oak savannahs, sandy prairies, roadsides in wooded areas, abandoned fields and pastures, steep banks. Native. FOOD USE: Use leaves fresh or dried for a tea or season- ing. The taste is reminiscent of oregano or bergamot. Con- servation 2. COMMENTS: This plant sometimes produces "frost flowers" in late autumn; as the roots push sap out of the broken vascular tissues, the sap freezes in thin sheets, curling around in layers to form erratic and beauti- ful formations (Frostweed Verbesing virginica is more famous for these ice ribbon structures., wild AKA stone mint, oregano. 520 