BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED,
STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC
Marrubium Horehound vulgare Lamiaceae (Mint family)
Extremely woolly, dark gray-green, clumped mint with clustered a mild in scent leaf
and QUICK short, CHECK: blunt, well-spaced, deeply ruffled leaves; flowers tightly
axils. ID difficulty 1.
Perennial with clumped stems. Stems 14-30" (36-76 cm) tall, leaning with to
DESCRIPTION: mm thick, squared, concave or channeled on all sides, densely coated ascending
white-gray upright, 3-5 wool, especially near the base; unbranched or with short, minor, full
Much more
branches. LYDS prominent. Leaves paired, well-spaced, to 1.2" (3 cm) long in sun
common west
but larger in shade, the blades broadly ovate to nearly round, about as wide as long,
densely coated with wool (especially below), blunt-tipped, curled, ruffled by extremely depressed veins above,
which protrude greatly below. Margins have large, blunt teeth. There are several prominent secondary veins
from the base. Petioles woolly, broad and flat or slightly channeled, the lower petioles to 60% of the blade
length, the upper ones reduced to sessile. Inflorescence (summer) dense axillary clusters of 8-30 flowers in
the upper half of branches and stems, with naked stem sections separating them; the clusters spaced more
closely toward the top. Beneath each cluster is a pair of drooping leaves. Calyx has 7-10 recurved needle-like
teeth that persist after bloom, forming hooks that attach it to clothing and fur; the walls are pleated by prominent
veins, and the tube is hairy inside. Corolla tubular and whitish, tiny, with 2 strongly diverging lips that are nearly
equal in length, the upper one rising and nearly straight with a split tip, the lower downcurved with 3 lobes.
HABITAT: Dry, usually open, moderately disturbed places. Old
homesites, meadows, roadsides, fields, vacant lots, open woods,
prairie dog towns. Introduced.
FOOD USE: The leaves are steeped for tea or boiled as a flavoring
for candies. They can also be chewed for their flavor.
COMMENTS: This mint has a bitter flavor that can be addictive.
It is soothing to the throat and has long been used to treat cold
symptoms.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED, STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC Marrubium Horehound vulgare Lamiaceae (Mint family) Extremely woolly, dark gray-green, clumped mint with clustered a mild in scent leaf and QUICK short, CHECK: blunt, well-spaced, deeply ruffled leaves; flowers tightly axils. ID difficulty 1. Perennial with clumped stems. Stems 14-30" (36-76 cm) tall, leaning with to DESCRIPTION: mm thick, squared, concave or channeled on all sides, densely coated ascending white-gray upright, 3-5 wool, especially near the base; unbranched or with short, minor, full Much more branches. LYDS prominent. Leaves paired, well-spaced, to 1.2" (3 cm) long in sun common west but larger in shade, the blades broadly ovate to nearly round, about as wide as long, densely coated with wool (especially below), blunt-tipped, curled, ruffled by extremely depressed veins above, which protrude greatly below. Margins have large, blunt teeth. There are several prominent secondary veins from the base. Petioles woolly, broad and flat or slightly channeled, the lower petioles to 60% of the blade length, the upper ones reduced to sessile. Inflorescence (summer) dense axillary clusters of 8-30 flowers in the upper half of branches and stems, with naked stem sections separating them; the clusters spaced more closely toward the top. Beneath each cluster is a pair of drooping leaves. Calyx has 7-10 recurved needle-like teeth that persist after bloom, forming hooks that attach it to clothing and fur; the walls are pleated by prominent veins, and the tube is hairy inside. Corolla tubular and whitish, tiny, with 2 strongly diverging lips that are nearly equal in length, the upper one rising and nearly straight with a split tip, the lower downcurved with 3 lobes. HABITAT: Dry, usually open, moderately disturbed places. Old homesites, meadows, roadsides, fields, vacant lots, open woods, prairie dog towns. Introduced. FOOD USE: The leaves are steeped for tea or boiled as a flavoring for candies. They can also be chewed for their flavor. COMMENTS: This mint has a bitter flavor that can be addictive. It is soothing to the throat and has long been used to treat cold symptoms. 