mm
0
1cm
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED,
STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC
10
Catnip
Nepeta cataria Lamiaceae (Mint family)
QUICK gated, CHECK: Aromatic mint with tightly clumped, tall stems and blunt-tipped, COV
woolly leaves that are silvery beneath. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Stems Perennial herb from a woody base with a peculiar
clumped, to 40" (1 m) tall, squared with 2 or all sides usually minty-musky concave smell
neled, almost evenly covered in short, dense, fine, soft hairs, much branched in or full chan-
Leaves paired, 0.8-3" (2-8 cm) long, ovate or triangular with heart-shaped bases, blunt- sun.
pointed with nipple tips, moderately soft-hairy above, densely woolly and silvery beneath. Midvein,
veinlets are deeply depressed above and protruding below. Margins have large, blunt to rounded, dot-tipped, veins, and
often overlapping teeth. Petioles 10% of blade length, hairy, channeled. Inflorescence terminal clusters, at
first densely packed, later elongating and spike-like (some flowers are sessile and others on short pedicels),
often branched into panicles, the flowers in small whorls. Flowers (summer) 8-12 mm long, irregular. tubular,
the calyx curvy with regular lobes, the corolla 2-lipped, the lower lip bent strongly downward and toothed or
scalloped, whitish with pink-purple spots; the sexual parts not or scarcely extending past the lips.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Yellow giant hyssop Agastache nepetoides (not dangerous and probably also edible)
looks very similar but tends to be taller and have a less clumping habit; the leaves and internodes are longer
It is not similarly aromatic.
HABITAT: Partial sun on rich, disturbed soil. Open forests, forest edges, vacant lots, fence lines, along build-
ing foundations, thickets. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Tender new leaves can be nibbled or used as a seasoning, if one likes the potent flavor. Leaves
of any age can be used to make an aromatic tea.
COMMENTS: This is the plant so adored by cats; it has по such intoxicating effect on humans. Catnip is easy
to find around most human habitations and the smell makes it hard to forget. Catnip must be pretty resilient;
I often see it growing along railroad tracks where all other vegetation has been killed off by herbicides. Don't
be tempted to collect it there. AKA catmint.
523
mm 0 1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED, STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC 10 Catnip Nepeta cataria Lamiaceae (Mint family) QUICK gated, CHECK: Aromatic mint with tightly clumped, tall stems and blunt-tipped, COV woolly leaves that are silvery beneath. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Stems Perennial herb from a woody base with a peculiar clumped, to 40" (1 m) tall, squared with 2 or all sides usually minty-musky concave smell neled, almost evenly covered in short, dense, fine, soft hairs, much branched in or full chan- Leaves paired, 0.8-3" (2-8 cm) long, ovate or triangular with heart-shaped bases, blunt- sun. pointed with nipple tips, moderately soft-hairy above, densely woolly and silvery beneath. Midvein, veinlets are deeply depressed above and protruding below. Margins have large, blunt to rounded, dot-tipped, veins, and often overlapping teeth. Petioles 10% of blade length, hairy, channeled. Inflorescence terminal clusters, at first densely packed, later elongating and spike-like (some flowers are sessile and others on short pedicels), often branched into panicles, the flowers in small whorls. Flowers (summer) 8-12 mm long, irregular. tubular, the calyx curvy with regular lobes, the corolla 2-lipped, the lower lip bent strongly downward and toothed or scalloped, whitish with pink-purple spots; the sexual parts not or scarcely extending past the lips. CONFUSING PLANTS: Yellow giant hyssop Agastache nepetoides (not dangerous and probably also edible) looks very similar but tends to be taller and have a less clumping habit; the leaves and internodes are longer It is not similarly aromatic. HABITAT: Partial sun on rich, disturbed soil. Open forests, forest edges, vacant lots, fence lines, along build- ing foundations, thickets. Introduced. FOOD USE: Tender new leaves can be nibbled or used as a seasoning, if one likes the potent flavor. Leaves of any age can be used to make an aromatic tea. COMMENTS: This is the plant so adored by cats; it has по such intoxicating effect on humans. Catnip is easy to find around most human habitations and the smell makes it hard to forget. Catnip must be pretty resilient; I often see it growing along railroad tracks where all other vegetation has been killed off by herbicides. Don't be tempted to collect it there. AKA catmint. 523 