STEMS BASAL
SEAVES ABSENT,LAVES PAIRE
Shiso
(Mint
family)
QUICK CHECK: Odd-smelling and prominent mint with arching large, broad, secondary leaves veins. with ID purple difficulty straight, midveins, 1. 6"-6'
Perilla frutescens
Lamiaceae
coarsely toothed Annual margins, emerging in early spring. and 4 grooves Stem erect, (like stinging single, nettle stalks), lowest
DESCRIPTION: (15-180 evenly cm) tall, and square symmetrically with rounded branched, corners starting as the main near stalk. the Stems base in of full mature sun. plants The have
branches usually of robust plants reach seedlings nearly are as hairy high all around the stems surface and petioles. is bumpy, Leaves sometimes paired, reddish-purple 2-6" (5-15 cm)
long. short broadly hairs on ovate the ridges; to nearly rounded or heart-shaped. hairy, more The so upper on margins and veins. Midvein depressed, veinlets purple also
(especially in full leaves. sun), Secondary sparsely to veins moderately are prominent, depressed, and teeth. arch Petioles toward the 15-30% tip; of blade are length,
lightly depressed. Margins have large, terminal and axillary racemes up to 6" (15 cm) Flowers long, (mid sum-
even on green broad, sharp, forward-pointed the flowers
narrowly channeled. on the Inflorescence side facing the numerous main stem, evenly spaced on pedicels covered 3-4 mm with long. long, erect, needle-like
mostly absent mm long, the calyx nearly regular and densely one is slightly broader and split
hairs. The has small, broad bract beneath it. After flowering the calyx spherical smooth
mer to fall) corolla tubular, is 3-4 light purple with 4 lobes of similar length but the upper enlarges to 6-7 mm long
with in two. 2 lower Each and flower 3 upper a lobes, all pointed and upturned, the mature calyx holding 4 almost
seeds, their light surface with dark reticulations.
HABITAT: Moist, rich, disturbed soil in shade or sun; yards, parks, pastures, barnyards, disturbed woodlots
and meadows. Introduced. I
FOOD USE: The greens can be collected from spring through late summer, but they are tenderest in spring
and early summer before flowering. They are used as a flavoring in many Asian cuisines-finely chopped raw,
cooked, fermented, or infused in vinegars and sauces. The seeds are oil-rich but have a strong flavor; they
are ground into a nutritive seasoning or pressed for an edible oil.
COMMENTS: Shiso is a little-known edible weed that is widespread and often abundant. It has been cultivated
for thousands of years in Asia and is grown and sold commercially in this country for Asian cuisine. The flavor
is strong and distinct and quite unlike our other mints. AKA beefsteak plant, perilla.
524
STEMS BASAL SEAVES ABSENT,LAVES PAIRE Shiso (Mint family) QUICK CHECK: Odd-smelling and prominent mint with arching large, broad, secondary leaves veins. with ID purple difficulty straight, midveins, 1. 6"-6' Perilla frutescens Lamiaceae coarsely toothed Annual margins, emerging in early spring. and 4 grooves Stem erect, (like stinging single, nettle stalks), lowest DESCRIPTION: (15-180 evenly cm) tall, and square symmetrically with rounded branched, corners starting as the main near stalk. the Stems base in of full mature sun. plants The have branches usually of robust plants reach seedlings nearly are as hairy high all around the stems surface and petioles. is bumpy, Leaves sometimes paired, reddish-purple 2-6" (5-15 cm) long. short broadly hairs on ovate the ridges; to nearly rounded or heart-shaped. hairy, more The so upper on margins and veins. Midvein depressed, veinlets purple also (especially in full leaves. sun), Secondary sparsely to veins moderately are prominent, depressed, and teeth. arch Petioles toward the 15-30% tip; of blade are length, lightly depressed. Margins have large, terminal and axillary racemes up to 6" (15 cm) Flowers long, (mid sum- even on green broad, sharp, forward-pointed the flowers narrowly channeled. on the Inflorescence side facing the numerous main stem, evenly spaced on pedicels covered 3-4 mm with long. long, erect, needle-like mostly absent mm long, the calyx nearly regular and densely one is slightly broader and split hairs. The has small, broad bract beneath it. After flowering the calyx spherical smooth mer to fall) corolla tubular, is 3-4 light purple with 4 lobes of similar length but the upper enlarges to 6-7 mm long with in two. 2 lower Each and flower 3 upper a lobes, all pointed and upturned, the mature calyx holding 4 almost seeds, their light surface with dark reticulations. HABITAT: Moist, rich, disturbed soil in shade or sun; yards, parks, pastures, barnyards, disturbed woodlots and meadows. Introduced. I FOOD USE: The greens can be collected from spring through late summer, but they are tenderest in spring and early summer before flowering. They are used as a flavoring in many Asian cuisines-finely chopped raw, cooked, fermented, or infused in vinegars and sauces. The seeds are oil-rich but have a strong flavor; they are ground into a nutritive seasoning or pressed for an edible oil. COMMENTS: Shiso is a little-known edible weed that is widespread and often abundant. It has been cultivated for thousands of years in Asia and is grown and sold commercially in this country for Asian cuisine. The flavor is strong and distinct and quite unlike our other mints. AKA beefsteak plant, perilla. 524 