Lamiaceoe (Mint family
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED,
STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC
12
Mint
[1]
IWE-224
genus Mentha
Lamiaceae (Mint family)
QUICK CHECK: Aromatic mints with tiny, nearly regular flowers in leaf axils. ID difficulty 1.
aromatic. DESCRIPTION: Stems Perennials forming colonies by a rhizome network, the aerial
squared, the faces concave, branched or unbranched, erect. Leaves parts minty-
nate, toothed, ovate to elliptic, 0.7-3" (18-80 mm) long, blunt-tipped when young but alter-
at-maturity, sparsely to densely hairy, sessile or with short petioles. Midvein and secondary pointed
veins are deeply depressed above; the veinlets are depressed but less so, giving the leaves
a slightly corrugated look. Inflorescence dense clusters in multiple leaf axils of the upper
Collective
stem-sometimes these are normal-sized leaves, other times they are reduced. Flowers
range of mints.
(summer) 2-6 mm long, the calyx almost symmetrical with 5 triangular lobes. Corolla tubular, almost twice as
long as the calyx, 2-4 mm across when open, purplish, 4 lobed (rarely 5), nearly regular in appearance but the
upper petal is usually slightly larger. Stamens and styles protrude. Seeds small and brown, 2-4 per capsule.
FOOD USE: To use fresh mint greens in salads, smoothies, or as a nibble, pick the new shoots and tips in
spring to early summer. Leaves can be picked any time and used fresh or dried for tea.
COMMENTS: North America is home to both native and introduced species of mint, and the introduced popu-
lations are often cultivated hybrids
Peppermint is a hybrid between
spearmint M. spicata and M. aquatica
Both peppermint and spearmint are
widespread as escapes from cultiva-
tion. While it is fun to learn to identify
the species, it is not necessary. as all
members of the genus Mentha can De
used similarly. However, the flavor
varies; most people prefer the flavor
of peppermint and spearmint over our
native wild mint. Just the three most
common mints are covered here.
Field mint
Mentha arvensis
This is the native mint that is wide-
spread across eastern North Amer-
ica, growing primarily on moist sites
in full to partial sun. It is most com-
mon in wet meadows, swamps, and
wetland margins. The stems and
leaves are somewhat to very soft-
hairy, and the flowers are in the axils
of normal-sized leaves rather than
reduced bracts in terminal spikes.
The flavor of wild mint can be like a
cross between spearmint and catnip,
but the aroma varies among differ-
ent populations of this species. If you
separate the Old-World species from
the American, ours is M. canadensis.
Conservation 1.
(Continued on the next page.)
Lamiaceoe (Mint family BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED, STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC 12 Mint [1] IWE-224 genus Mentha Lamiaceae (Mint family) QUICK CHECK: Aromatic mints with tiny, nearly regular flowers in leaf axils. ID difficulty 1. aromatic. DESCRIPTION: Stems Perennials forming colonies by a rhizome network, the aerial squared, the faces concave, branched or unbranched, erect. Leaves parts minty- nate, toothed, ovate to elliptic, 0.7-3" (18-80 mm) long, blunt-tipped when young but alter- at-maturity, sparsely to densely hairy, sessile or with short petioles. Midvein and secondary pointed veins are deeply depressed above; the veinlets are depressed but less so, giving the leaves a slightly corrugated look. Inflorescence dense clusters in multiple leaf axils of the upper Collective stem-sometimes these are normal-sized leaves, other times they are reduced. Flowers range of mints. (summer) 2-6 mm long, the calyx almost symmetrical with 5 triangular lobes. Corolla tubular, almost twice as long as the calyx, 2-4 mm across when open, purplish, 4 lobed (rarely 5), nearly regular in appearance but the upper petal is usually slightly larger. Stamens and styles protrude. Seeds small and brown, 2-4 per capsule. FOOD USE: To use fresh mint greens in salads, smoothies, or as a nibble, pick the new shoots and tips in spring to early summer. Leaves can be picked any time and used fresh or dried for tea. COMMENTS: North America is home to both native and introduced species of mint, and the introduced popu- lations are often cultivated hybrids Peppermint is a hybrid between spearmint M. spicata and M. aquatica Both peppermint and spearmint are widespread as escapes from cultiva- tion. While it is fun to learn to identify the species, it is not necessary. as all members of the genus Mentha can De used similarly. However, the flavor varies; most people prefer the flavor of peppermint and spearmint over our native wild mint. Just the three most common mints are covered here. Field mint Mentha arvensis This is the native mint that is wide- spread across eastern North Amer- ica, growing primarily on moist sites in full to partial sun. It is most com- mon in wet meadows, swamps, and wetland margins. The stems and leaves are somewhat to very soft- hairy, and the flowers are in the axils of normal-sized leaves rather than reduced bracts in terminal spikes. The flavor of wild mint can be like a cross between spearmint and catnip, but the aroma varies among differ- ent populations of this species. If you separate the Old-World species from the American, ours is M. canadensis. Conservation 1. (Continued on the next page.) 