0
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED,
STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC
13 Tall woodmint
Blephilia hirsuta Lamiaceae (Mint family)
QUICK packed CHECK: clusters Tall mint with lanceolate, hairy leaves with a few teeth;
of flowers in progressively closer leaf axils at the apex. stacked, ID difficulty munder,
DESCRIPTION: clumps, often Perennial spreading by short rhizomes and layering, 1,
ing with reduced, soft but evergreen overwintering leaves on short usually growing in
on other a ground-hugging mat. Stems 20-74" (50-185 cm) tall, erect but weak, often stems form-
vegetation, simple or with occasional major branches, squared with shallow leaning
Leaves trough on each side, densely covered with long, erect to downcurved hairs, the internodes a 4-8' (10-20
few 2.5-4" (6-10 cm) long, lanceolate or ovate, acute at the base, pointed at the tip. the cm) long.
a scattered, small teeth. Surface densely erect-hairy above, less so below: secondary veins margins are deeply with
depressed above. Inflorescence 1-5 densely-packed whorls stacked on top of each other to form a terminal
spike 0.8-3" (2-8 cm) long; the lowermost whorls are often separated by a small space, but the others are
touching. Underneath each whorl of flowers are 2 reduced leaves and a dense whorl of overlapping, ell ptic
to ovate, often purplish bracts 7-9 mm long (shorter than the flowers), with long hairs on the margins. Flow-
ers (summer) 8-12 mm long, the calyx almost symmetrical. Corolla white with purple spots, highly irregular the
lower lip 3-lobed and bent down; 2 stamens are held close to the upper lip and extend beyond it at maturity.
HABITAT: Rich forests with moist soil, especially high parts of floodplains and lower slopes, growing best in
sunny openings or on the margins of such forests. Native.
FOOD USE: Young greens in spring as an herb; through the growing season the mature leaves can be used for
tea. A flush of new growth is produced in autumn after the tops die, available until severe cold. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This tall, elegant, and fragile species has a strong, pleasant scent closer to Mentho than any
other non-Mentha species. The name Blephilia is Greek for "eyelash," in reference to the long hairs or the
bracts. AKA hairy woodmint. There is a close relative, B. ciliata. usually called "downy woodmint." These
names are too similar to be functional, 50 the two species have been frequently confused, even in the profes-
sional literature, with the qualities of one often attributed to the other. B. ciliata is much smaller, grows in dry
limestone woodlands, and has little minty scent.
0 BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED, STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC 13 Tall woodmint Blephilia hirsuta Lamiaceae (Mint family) QUICK packed CHECK: clusters Tall mint with lanceolate, hairy leaves with a few teeth; of flowers in progressively closer leaf axils at the apex. stacked, ID difficulty munder, DESCRIPTION: clumps, often Perennial spreading by short rhizomes and layering, 1, ing with reduced, soft but evergreen overwintering leaves on short usually growing in on other a ground-hugging mat. Stems 20-74" (50-185 cm) tall, erect but weak, often stems form- vegetation, simple or with occasional major branches, squared with shallow leaning Leaves trough on each side, densely covered with long, erect to downcurved hairs, the internodes a 4-8' (10-20 few 2.5-4" (6-10 cm) long, lanceolate or ovate, acute at the base, pointed at the tip. the cm) long. a scattered, small teeth. Surface densely erect-hairy above, less so below: secondary veins margins are deeply with depressed above. Inflorescence 1-5 densely-packed whorls stacked on top of each other to form a terminal spike 0.8-3" (2-8 cm) long; the lowermost whorls are often separated by a small space, but the others are touching. Underneath each whorl of flowers are 2 reduced leaves and a dense whorl of overlapping, ell ptic to ovate, often purplish bracts 7-9 mm long (shorter than the flowers), with long hairs on the margins. Flow- ers (summer) 8-12 mm long, the calyx almost symmetrical. Corolla white with purple spots, highly irregular the lower lip 3-lobed and bent down; 2 stamens are held close to the upper lip and extend beyond it at maturity. HABITAT: Rich forests with moist soil, especially high parts of floodplains and lower slopes, growing best in sunny openings or on the margins of such forests. Native. FOOD USE: Young greens in spring as an herb; through the growing season the mature leaves can be used for tea. A flush of new growth is produced in autumn after the tops die, available until severe cold. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This tall, elegant, and fragile species has a strong, pleasant scent closer to Mentho than any other non-Mentha species. The name Blephilia is Greek for "eyelash," in reference to the long hairs or the bracts. AKA hairy woodmint. There is a close relative, B. ciliata. usually called "downy woodmint." These names are too similar to be functional, 50 the two species have been frequently confused, even in the profes- sional literature, with the qualities of one often attributed to the other. B. ciliata is much smaller, grows in dry limestone woodlands, and has little minty scent. 