STEMS BASAL
14 Creeping Charlie
Lamiaceae
(Mint
family)
Glechoma hederacea
over
the
ground;
mats
QUICK CHECK: have Creeping blunt teeth; plant with purple an flowers odd musky hang smell to one forming side of short erect colonies. stems.
DESCRIPTION: ID broad difficulty leaves 1. Perennial spreading erect by rhizomes stems. Stems or rooting may at creep stem invisible, or nodes stand but to erect form you up can to feel 13"
Rhizomes (33 cm); they whitish, are squared thinner and than and a fringe hollow the of with much very longer short hairs (almost at heart-shaped each node. Erect at the plants base, have hairless one have or except two large, long-stalked along rounded the
them) hairs near on the the angles base. Leaves paired, rounded at the above tip, and protruding below. blade Margins but on upper leaves
leaves from below. Veins deeply depressed longer than the Inflorescence (summer they
teeth margin with and gland on veins spots of blade at the length. tip. Petioles They are of shallowly lower borne leaves to channeled one are side. with Corolla hairy tubular, margins. irregular, with with purple an upper mottling. and
to lower are fall) only lip short-stalked 30-60% and one reflexed axillary lobe clusters on each of 3-8, side; all the outside is purple, beyond the the inside upper. is white
lower lip extends slightly
The forest edges, fields, brushy areas, from full Introduced. sun to moder- I
HABITAT: shade. Prefers Lawns, moist soil with moderate to high fertility.
FOOD ate USE: The leaves can be used as a flavoring in brewing beer or for tea.
For millions of us, the smell of this plant when hit by a
lawnmower COMMENTS: is a familiar part of summer. AKA gill-over-the-ground, ground
ivy, runaway-robin,
jenny-run-up-the-
hedge-and-around-
back-of-the-duck-
coop-then-slowly-
through-the-
orchard-to-the-
rhubarb-and-back-
in-just-a-month.
15 Horsemints
genus Monarda (in part)
Lamiaceae (Mint family)
QUICK CHECK: Mints of dry, poor soil with leaves of varying size in opposing clusters;
stacked whorls of spotted flowers with long divergent lips, above a whorl of showy
bracks ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennials or annuals. Stems usually multiple, 18-32" (45-80 cm) tall,
squared, with minute downcurved hairs, usually more at the nodes, Leaves usually droop-
ing and deeply folded on mature plants, borne in pairs with an axillary cluster of 2 or more
Collective range.
smaller than leaves. This often takes the appearance of opposing sets of 3, with the middle leaf of each much
both longer sides. the outer 2. Blades long-elliptic, pointed, tapered at both ends, with widely-spaced teeth, set on
back toward Midvein and secondary veins are depressed above and protruding below; hairy
margins and scarcely the leaf channeled. tip. Petioles up to 30% of blade length (but upper leaves often secondary sessile), ciliate veins on cui the a
widely separated, the associated Inflorescence multiple axillary whorls stacked along the upper
veins from the base. whorl of many oval, entire, hairy-edged, sharp-tipped each whorl of flowers
is di crowded, overlapping leaves progressively decreasing in size. Underneath stem, sometimes
separating into Flowers (summer) 0.6-1,2" species they are to
pink or whitish and showier These than bracts the are flowers. usually green on M. pectinata, but on our bracts other with multiple prominent red
528 nearly equal, narrow, pointed, hairy-edged lobes. Corolla (15-30 tubular mm) at long first, with the tubular a tubular portion calyx
STEMS BASAL 14 Creeping Charlie Lamiaceae (Mint family) Glechoma hederacea over the ground; mats QUICK CHECK: have Creeping blunt teeth; plant with purple an flowers odd musky hang smell to one forming side of short erect colonies. stems. DESCRIPTION: ID broad difficulty leaves 1. Perennial spreading erect by rhizomes stems. Stems or rooting may at creep stem invisible, or nodes stand but to erect form you up can to feel 13" Rhizomes (33 cm); they whitish, are squared thinner and than and a fringe hollow the of with much very longer short hairs (almost at heart-shaped each node. Erect at the plants base, have hairless one have or except two large, long-stalked along rounded the them) hairs near on the the angles base. Leaves paired, rounded at the above tip, and protruding below. blade Margins but on upper leaves leaves from below. Veins deeply depressed longer than the Inflorescence (summer they teeth margin with and gland on veins spots of blade at the length. tip. Petioles They are of shallowly lower borne leaves to channeled one are side. with Corolla hairy tubular, margins. irregular, with with purple an upper mottling. and to lower are fall) only lip short-stalked 30-60% and one reflexed axillary lobe clusters on each of 3-8, side; all the outside is purple, beyond the the inside upper. is white lower lip extends slightly The forest edges, fields, brushy areas, from full Introduced. sun to moder- I HABITAT: shade. Prefers Lawns, moist soil with moderate to high fertility. FOOD ate USE: The leaves can be used as a flavoring in brewing beer or for tea. For millions of us, the smell of this plant when hit by a lawnmower COMMENTS: is a familiar part of summer. AKA gill-over-the-ground, ground ivy, runaway-robin, jenny-run-up-the- hedge-and-around- back-of-the-duck- coop-then-slowly- through-the- orchard-to-the- rhubarb-and-back- in-just-a-month. 15 Horsemints genus Monarda (in part) Lamiaceae (Mint family) QUICK CHECK: Mints of dry, poor soil with leaves of varying size in opposing clusters; stacked whorls of spotted flowers with long divergent lips, above a whorl of showy bracks ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennials or annuals. Stems usually multiple, 18-32" (45-80 cm) tall, squared, with minute downcurved hairs, usually more at the nodes, Leaves usually droop- ing and deeply folded on mature plants, borne in pairs with an axillary cluster of 2 or more Collective range. smaller than leaves. This often takes the appearance of opposing sets of 3, with the middle leaf of each much both longer sides. the outer 2. Blades long-elliptic, pointed, tapered at both ends, with widely-spaced teeth, set on back toward Midvein and secondary veins are depressed above and protruding below; hairy margins and scarcely the leaf channeled. tip. Petioles up to 30% of blade length (but upper leaves often secondary sessile), ciliate veins on cui the a widely separated, the associated Inflorescence multiple axillary whorls stacked along the upper veins from the base. whorl of many oval, entire, hairy-edged, sharp-tipped each whorl of flowers is di crowded, overlapping leaves progressively decreasing in size. Underneath stem, sometimes separating into Flowers (summer) 0.6-1,2" species they are to pink or whitish and showier These than bracts the are flowers. usually green on M. pectinata, but on our bracts other with multiple prominent red 528 nearly equal, narrow, pointed, hairy-edged lobes. Corolla (15-30 tubular mm) at long first, with the tubular a tubular portion calyx 