BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED,
STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC
about lips. The as long as the calyx; it diverges widely into two long,
tip. Stamens upper lip arches; the lower is folded downward and narrow, 3-lobed spotted at the
hidden beneath the upper lip.
HABITAT: Dry, poor, and typically sandy soil, usually in full sun; most
on roadsides, dry prairles, pine or oak barrens, and steep open slopes. Native. common 4
FOOD USE: The leaves can be gathered at any time to use fresh or dried for
tea. As a seasoning herb you want tender ones from spring or early summer.
Flowers can be picked as a flavoring in late summer.
COMMENTS: These beautiful natives are a pleasant sight on summer road-
sides, perfect to establish in a sandy front yard. There are 2 basic groups in the
genus Monarda: those with single terminal flower clusters (#16, bergamots),
and those with multiple stacked whorls below the terminal cluster (#15,
horsemints). There are at least 4 species in the horsemint-monarda group;
two of them are shown here.
Dotted horsemint M. punctata is a short-lived perennial with very showy
whitish to pink bracts and yellowish flowers.
Lemon monarda M. citriodora is distinguished by having several small leaves
of varying size, often asymmetrical, clustered in the leaf axils. The bracts
are whitish to purple and the corolla ranges from white to red-purplish and
is gland-dotted, hairy on the outside and in the throat. This species is only
slightly more lemony than the others.
(left) Dotted horsemint. (middle and right) Lemon monarda.
16 Bergamot
(in
part)
Lamiaceae
(Mint
family)
Monarda
genus with toothed leaves and dense, rounded, difficulty terminal 1.
QUICK CHECK: Aromatic purple to mints red flowers with long, thin, divergent lips. rhizomes, ID the form
clusters of tubular, Perennial herbs often growing in cm) colonies tall, unbranched from thin or with ascending and
the axillary internodes branches, long. Leaves paired, with scattered 2-4" (5-10 teeth, sometimes with page.) a purplish when young. Surface
DESCRIPTION: much taller than wide. squared Stems but erect, the angles 2-6' (60-180 not sharp, cm) hollow, long, narrowly soft-hairy, ovate the to sides lanceolate, flat halo
hairy, pointed, more the so margins below and entire along or the midvein. (Continued on the next
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED, STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC about lips. The as long as the calyx; it diverges widely into two long, tip. Stamens upper lip arches; the lower is folded downward and narrow, 3-lobed spotted at the hidden beneath the upper lip. HABITAT: Dry, poor, and typically sandy soil, usually in full sun; most on roadsides, dry prairles, pine or oak barrens, and steep open slopes. Native. common 4 FOOD USE: The leaves can be gathered at any time to use fresh or dried for tea. As a seasoning herb you want tender ones from spring or early summer. Flowers can be picked as a flavoring in late summer. COMMENTS: These beautiful natives are a pleasant sight on summer road- sides, perfect to establish in a sandy front yard. There are 2 basic groups in the genus Monarda: those with single terminal flower clusters (#16, bergamots), and those with multiple stacked whorls below the terminal cluster (#15, horsemints). There are at least 4 species in the horsemint-monarda group; two of them are shown here. Dotted horsemint M. punctata is a short-lived perennial with very showy whitish to pink bracts and yellowish flowers. Lemon monarda M. citriodora is distinguished by having several small leaves of varying size, often asymmetrical, clustered in the leaf axils. The bracts are whitish to purple and the corolla ranges from white to red-purplish and is gland-dotted, hairy on the outside and in the throat. This species is only slightly more lemony than the others. (left) Dotted horsemint. (middle and right) Lemon monarda. 16 Bergamot (in part) Lamiaceae (Mint family) Monarda genus with toothed leaves and dense, rounded, difficulty terminal 1. QUICK CHECK: Aromatic purple to mints red flowers with long, thin, divergent lips. rhizomes, ID the form clusters of tubular, Perennial herbs often growing in cm) colonies tall, unbranched from thin or with ascending and the axillary internodes branches, long. Leaves paired, with scattered 2-4" (5-10 teeth, sometimes with page.) a purplish when young. Surface DESCRIPTION: much taller than wide. squared Stems but erect, the angles 2-6' (60-180 not sharp, cm) hollow, long, narrowly soft-hairy, ovate the to sides lanceolate, flat halo hairy, pointed, more the so margins below and entire along or the midvein. (Continued on the next 