STEMS SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC PAIRED,
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES
GROUP 32 BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED,
STEMS SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC
stemmed his group plants contains several non-aromatic members of the mint family,
leafy and from several other families. The edible parts produced as well as square-
edible greens seeds. shoots as well as some tubers and rhizomes; one include many
90° to that Plants in group 32 have decussate leaves (the axis of each species produces
squared of the adjacent pairs). Giant St. John's wort has stems that are opposing pair is
has when young but only faintly 50 when older, and so may key to very strongly
plant basal leaves when young and is included in group 21, but since this group is surpris- 33. Cup
included in this key as well.
ing based on its form, and the basal leaves disappear completely by flowering, it is
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 32
The key is not your final answer!
Leaf simple.
Leaf margins toothed, not bristled or lobed.
or
Leaves winged to the stem, the wings joined and enlarged to form a cup. Cup plant (p. 307).
Leaves with distinct petioles.
Leaves drooping, crowded, and overlapping above a conspicuously naked stem section.
1. Purple deadnettle
Leaves spreading to ascending, not crowded and overlapping, evenly spaced.
Plants less than 20" tall at maturity, leaves blunt, teeth rounded.
3. Florida betony
or
Plants more than 24" tall at maturity, leaves and teeth pointed.
Stem conspicuously enlarged below each node, flowers pink-purple and 2-lipped.
all secondary veins pinnate, stinging hairs absent.
5. Hemp-nettle
Stem not enlarged below the node, flowers tiny and unshowy in drooping clusters,
some major veins from the leaf base, stinging hairs present.
7. Stinging nettle
Leaves mostly sessile or nearly sessile.
or
Leaves drooping, crowded, and overlapping above a conspicuously naked stem section.
1. Purple deadnettle
Leaves not drooping, evenly spaced.
Blade stiff-hairy with strongly depressed veinlets, flowers 2-lipped.
4. Woundwort
Blades hairless or soft hairy, veinlets scarcely depressed, flowers 4-lobed.
6. Bugleweed
2. Henbit
Leaf lobed, with large rounded teeth.
8. Virginia meadow beauty
margins with tiny, bristle-tipped teeth.
entire.
Stems erect and stiff, 3-6' (1-2 m) tall, more than 4 mm thick.
Stems 4-7 mm thick, stem and leaves hairless, veins strongly offset by light color,
9. Giant St. John's wort
flowers yellow.
or
Stems 8-15 mm thick, stem and leaves at least faintly hairy, veins not strongly offset
10. Purple loosestrife
by light color, flowers purple.
11. Stitchwort
Stems creeping to weakly erect, to 30" (75 cm) long, 1-2 mm thick.
12. Romerillo
impound. flets evate or lanceolate and unlobed; heads with white rays.
13. Spanish needles
Hets deeply lobed; heads with yellow rays, of no rays.
531
STEMS SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC PAIRED, BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES GROUP 32 BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED, STEMS SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC stemmed his group plants contains several non-aromatic members of the mint family, leafy and from several other families. The edible parts produced as well as square- edible greens seeds. shoots as well as some tubers and rhizomes; one include many 90° to that Plants in group 32 have decussate leaves (the axis of each species produces squared of the adjacent pairs). Giant St. John's wort has stems that are opposing pair is has when young but only faintly 50 when older, and so may key to very strongly plant basal leaves when young and is included in group 21, but since this group is surpris- 33. Cup included in this key as well. ing based on its form, and the basal leaves disappear completely by flowering, it is TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 32 The key is not your final answer! Leaf simple. Leaf margins toothed, not bristled or lobed. or Leaves winged to the stem, the wings joined and enlarged to form a cup. Cup plant (p. 307). Leaves with distinct petioles. Leaves drooping, crowded, and overlapping above a conspicuously naked stem section. 1. Purple deadnettle Leaves spreading to ascending, not crowded and overlapping, evenly spaced. Plants less than 20" tall at maturity, leaves blunt, teeth rounded. 3. Florida betony or Plants more than 24" tall at maturity, leaves and teeth pointed. Stem conspicuously enlarged below each node, flowers pink-purple and 2-lipped. all secondary veins pinnate, stinging hairs absent. 5. Hemp-nettle Stem not enlarged below the node, flowers tiny and unshowy in drooping clusters, some major veins from the leaf base, stinging hairs present. 7. Stinging nettle Leaves mostly sessile or nearly sessile. or Leaves drooping, crowded, and overlapping above a conspicuously naked stem section. 1. Purple deadnettle Leaves not drooping, evenly spaced. Blade stiff-hairy with strongly depressed veinlets, flowers 2-lipped. 4. Woundwort Blades hairless or soft hairy, veinlets scarcely depressed, flowers 4-lobed. 6. Bugleweed 2. Henbit Leaf lobed, with large rounded teeth. 8. Virginia meadow beauty margins with tiny, bristle-tipped teeth. entire. Stems erect and stiff, 3-6' (1-2 m) tall, more than 4 mm thick. Stems 4-7 mm thick, stem and leaves hairless, veins strongly offset by light color, 9. Giant St. John's wort flowers yellow. or Stems 8-15 mm thick, stem and leaves at least faintly hairy, veins not strongly offset 10. Purple loosestrife by light color, flowers purple. 11. Stitchwort Stems creeping to weakly erect, to 30" (75 cm) long, 1-2 mm thick. 12. Romerillo impound. flets evate or lanceolate and unlobed; heads with white rays. 13. Spanish needles Hets deeply lobed; heads with yellow rays, of no rays. 531 