STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED,
Bergamot (continued)
veins 9-11 per side, 45° to the midvein, depressed above. tuft Leaves of hair sessile below
Midvein depressed above. Secondary petioles to 25% of blade length. There is sometimes Inflorescence a (sum-
or on short, Leaves shallowly are channeled often covered with up a white fungal infection mm) later across in the (not summer. stacked whorls), resembling
the petiole. convex terminal cluster 0,7-1,5" (18-38 entire bracts, to 1.3" (33 mm) long. Flow-
mer) a densely packed, beneath it is whorl of several elliptic to ovate, tubular, tipped with
a composite head; cm) long, narrow, a whitish to pink, purple or bright scarlet. Calyx a thin tube at the base gradually 5 narrow,
ers 0.8-1.6" (2-4 equal in length. Corolla extends far beyond the calyx, and arching. The
pointed lobes almost diverging at a broad angle into 2 long and slender lips, the upper one narrower protrude beyond
style widening, is hidden then beneath the downcurved edges of the upper lip; so are the stamens, but they it
HABITAT: Well-drained soil in full to partial sun; occasionally in moister sites. Fields, roadsides, meadows,
pastures, sparse woods, forest openings. All listed species are native, although some are planted outside of
their native ranges.
FOOD USE: Gather leaves and dry them; they're best in early summer but can be used any time in teas, or
dried and used as a seasoning similar to oregano. Tender growing tops in spring are best. Flowers can be used
similarly; they're extremely potent. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This strongly and uniquely flavored mint is one of our most common. The flowers have the
most potent minty-hot flavor that I have encountered in any North American plant. Although it is commonly
claimed that bergamot is a flavoring in Earl Grey tea, this refers to a different and totally unrelated plant in
the citrus family. There are several species in our region, and although the flavor of all varies slightly, they can
be used similarly. A few common ones are pictured below. AKA bee-balm, Oswego tea.
Wild bergamot M. fistulosa is the most common species in our region, growing 2-4' (60-120 cm) tall and pro-
ducing light purple flowers. It inhabits well-drained sunny fields and meadows. This species is highly variable
and some taxonomists have divided it into several species.
Scarlet bee-balm M. didyma is our tallest species, and with its large scarlet flowers, probably our most striking.
It is less aromatic than the others, and the milder flowers make a beautiful garnish. It is found in openings or
sparse woodlands with rich, moist soil, especially in floodplains and valleys.
530
(left) Scarlet bee balm. (middle and right) Wild bergamot.
STEMS SQUARED, MINTY-AROMATIC BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED, Bergamot (continued) veins 9-11 per side, 45° to the midvein, depressed above. tuft Leaves of hair sessile below Midvein depressed above. Secondary petioles to 25% of blade length. There is sometimes Inflorescence a (sum- or on short, Leaves shallowly are channeled often covered with up a white fungal infection mm) later across in the (not summer. stacked whorls), resembling the petiole. convex terminal cluster 0,7-1,5" (18-38 entire bracts, to 1.3" (33 mm) long. Flow- mer) a densely packed, beneath it is whorl of several elliptic to ovate, tubular, tipped with a composite head; cm) long, narrow, a whitish to pink, purple or bright scarlet. Calyx a thin tube at the base gradually 5 narrow, ers 0.8-1.6" (2-4 equal in length. Corolla extends far beyond the calyx, and arching. The pointed lobes almost diverging at a broad angle into 2 long and slender lips, the upper one narrower protrude beyond style widening, is hidden then beneath the downcurved edges of the upper lip; so are the stamens, but they it HABITAT: Well-drained soil in full to partial sun; occasionally in moister sites. Fields, roadsides, meadows, pastures, sparse woods, forest openings. All listed species are native, although some are planted outside of their native ranges. FOOD USE: Gather leaves and dry them; they're best in early summer but can be used any time in teas, or dried and used as a seasoning similar to oregano. Tender growing tops in spring are best. Flowers can be used similarly; they're extremely potent. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This strongly and uniquely flavored mint is one of our most common. The flowers have the most potent minty-hot flavor that I have encountered in any North American plant. Although it is commonly claimed that bergamot is a flavoring in Earl Grey tea, this refers to a different and totally unrelated plant in the citrus family. There are several species in our region, and although the flavor of all varies slightly, they can be used similarly. A few common ones are pictured below. AKA bee-balm, Oswego tea. Wild bergamot M. fistulosa is the most common species in our region, growing 2-4' (60-120 cm) tall and pro- ducing light purple flowers. It inhabits well-drained sunny fields and meadows. This species is highly variable and some taxonomists have divided it into several species. Scarlet bee-balm M. didyma is our tallest species, and with its large scarlet flowers, probably our most striking. It is less aromatic than the others, and the milder flowers make a beautiful garnish. It is found in openings or sparse woodlands with rich, moist soil, especially in floodplains and valleys. 530 (left) Scarlet bee balm. (middle and right) Wild bergamot. 