BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES
SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC PAIRED,
2
Henbit
OF
1
Lamium amplexicaule
Lamiaceae (Mint family)
clasping, DUICK CHECK: ruffled Short, unbranched mint with well separated
leaves; flowers projecting above the upper leaves. DRIVE of ID difficulty
in DESCRIPTION: winter, Short winter annual. Stems prostrate, twisted, rooting, 2.
(10-30 cm) forming tall mats over the soil. In early spring these mats give rise to and much branched
Stems are which are rarely branched and have very long internodes erect stems 1-12'
overlap square, the corners ridged, hairless or with short. soft hairs. ^ near the base.
equally broad, each other, encircling the base of the stem. Leaves paired, usually less pair than of leaves
deeply the surface densely hairy and corrugated by deeply depressed veins. 1" Winter cm) long and about
leaves palmately lobed. Leaves of erect stems are shallowly 3-lobed with a few large, leaves are often
a few are on petioles often several times longer than the blade. Upper leaves (more rounded 'eeth. Lower
flowers well-spaced pairs, clasping the stem and touching, semicircular in outline. Inflorescence commonly noticed) r.
the in the leaf axils, in early spring and sometimes again in fall; strongly ascending and a wher' ting of above 3 few
topmost leaves. Flowers (spring) have a hairy calyx at the base with long, sharp lobes. project Corolla 0 2'
(13-20 mm) long, the lower 2/3 a narrow hairy cylinder, then abruptly widening into 2 lips, purple pink to 5-0 rarely
white with darker purple mottling, the upper hood very hairy and the lower lip constricted before droping
and widening into 2 cupped lobes (like a hanging paper heart).
CONFUSING PLANTS: Creeping charlie (p. 528) is aromatic and has leaves that are bluntly toothed but not
lobed; all of its leaves have petioles, and its flowers are not held erect.
HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in sun or light shade: lawns, parks, forest borders. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Collect tender young leaves and upper stems in early to
mid spring, and use as a potherb or salad green.
COMMENTS: The flavor is not bitter or astringent; it's peculiar with
a faint aroma. Don't let that description trick you into thinking t's
particularly exciting.
Henbit blooming
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC PAIRED, 2 Henbit OF 1 Lamium amplexicaule Lamiaceae (Mint family) clasping, DUICK CHECK: ruffled Short, unbranched mint with well separated leaves; flowers projecting above the upper leaves. DRIVE of ID difficulty in DESCRIPTION: winter, Short winter annual. Stems prostrate, twisted, rooting, 2. (10-30 cm) forming tall mats over the soil. In early spring these mats give rise to and much branched Stems are which are rarely branched and have very long internodes erect stems 1-12' overlap square, the corners ridged, hairless or with short. soft hairs. ^ near the base. equally broad, each other, encircling the base of the stem. Leaves paired, usually less pair than of leaves deeply the surface densely hairy and corrugated by deeply depressed veins. 1" Winter cm) long and about leaves palmately lobed. Leaves of erect stems are shallowly 3-lobed with a few large, leaves are often a few are on petioles often several times longer than the blade. Upper leaves (more rounded 'eeth. Lower flowers well-spaced pairs, clasping the stem and touching, semicircular in outline. Inflorescence commonly noticed) r. the in the leaf axils, in early spring and sometimes again in fall; strongly ascending and a wher' ting of above 3 few topmost leaves. Flowers (spring) have a hairy calyx at the base with long, sharp lobes. project Corolla 0 2' (13-20 mm) long, the lower 2/3 a narrow hairy cylinder, then abruptly widening into 2 lips, purple pink to 5-0 rarely white with darker purple mottling, the upper hood very hairy and the lower lip constricted before droping and widening into 2 cupped lobes (like a hanging paper heart). CONFUSING PLANTS: Creeping charlie (p. 528) is aromatic and has leaves that are bluntly toothed but not lobed; all of its leaves have petioles, and its flowers are not held erect. HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in sun or light shade: lawns, parks, forest borders. Introduced. FOOD USE: Collect tender young leaves and upper stems in early to mid spring, and use as a potherb or salad green. COMMENTS: The flavor is not bitter or astringent; it's peculiar with a faint aroma. Don't let that description trick you into thinking t's particularly exciting. Henbit blooming 