NOT
1
Lamium purpureum Lamiaceae (Mint family)
Purple deadnettle
2
naked most of their length with a tuft of drooping, them.
often QUICK purple NECK: leaves Short, crowded erect stems at the top, the irregular flowers layered among
ID difficulty 1. Short winter annual. Stems 6-17" (15-43 cm) tall, often unbranched forming dense in the
DESCRIPTION: disturbed soil, branching and clustered at the base but have small,
upper part; creeping leaves with long, ciliate, flat-topped petioles. Erect squared, tuft of leaves reddish near toward the top.
colonies on and rooting, then turning abruptly erect. Creeping stems stems are
closely spaced, minute paired hairs; they are naked for much of their length with a densely packed and progressively smaller
Leaves (of heart-shaped erect to ovate or triangular, crowded (especially at the beginning of flowering) soft, nearly appressed
the top. with stems) paired, up to 1.4" (36 mm) long, largest at the bottom of the tuft and overlapping
upward, drooping, the topmost often purplish. Surfaces densely covered with have blunt
at the stem Midvein apex, and veins are deeply depressed, giving a highly corrugated texture. Margins large,
hairs. rounded teeth. Petioles channeled, hairy, on flowering stems decreasing upward from 25% to 5% of the
to blade length. Winter growth has decumbent stems, longer petioles, and green leaves. Inflorescence whorls
of several from crowded leaf axils. Flowers (mostly late winter and early spring, but occasionally other times)
tubular and irregular, 0.4-0.7" (10-18 mm) long. Calyx bristly, the lobes longer than the tube. Corolla about
3 times the calyx length, the upper lip hood-like and hairy, the lower lip pinched together in the middle, beyond
which it angles sharply downward and splits into two lobes, each with a purple spot in the middle.
HABITAT: Moist, fertile soil in sunlit to partially shaded disturbed ground such as lawns, yards, parks, trail-
sides, orchards. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Gather the tender stems and greens by plucking or cutting in early spring-preferably before
any flowers open. Their flavor is mild and the texture pleasant-good but not exceptional as a nibble, in salad,
or as a potherb.
COMMENTS: Abundant in many urban and rural areas, these pretty little weeds are easy-to-locate springtime
edibles for the backyard forager. Interestingly, the plant produces some self-pollinating flowers with smaller
corollas that do not open.
NOT 1 Lamium purpureum Lamiaceae (Mint family) Purple deadnettle 2 naked most of their length with a tuft of drooping, them. often QUICK purple NECK: leaves Short, crowded erect stems at the top, the irregular flowers layered among ID difficulty 1. Short winter annual. Stems 6-17" (15-43 cm) tall, often unbranched forming dense in the DESCRIPTION: disturbed soil, branching and clustered at the base but have small, upper part; creeping leaves with long, ciliate, flat-topped petioles. Erect squared, tuft of leaves reddish near toward the top. colonies on and rooting, then turning abruptly erect. Creeping stems stems are closely spaced, minute paired hairs; they are naked for much of their length with a densely packed and progressively smaller Leaves (of heart-shaped erect to ovate or triangular, crowded (especially at the beginning of flowering) soft, nearly appressed the top. with stems) paired, up to 1.4" (36 mm) long, largest at the bottom of the tuft and overlapping upward, drooping, the topmost often purplish. Surfaces densely covered with have blunt at the stem Midvein apex, and veins are deeply depressed, giving a highly corrugated texture. Margins large, hairs. rounded teeth. Petioles channeled, hairy, on flowering stems decreasing upward from 25% to 5% of the to blade length. Winter growth has decumbent stems, longer petioles, and green leaves. Inflorescence whorls of several from crowded leaf axils. Flowers (mostly late winter and early spring, but occasionally other times) tubular and irregular, 0.4-0.7" (10-18 mm) long. Calyx bristly, the lobes longer than the tube. Corolla about 3 times the calyx length, the upper lip hood-like and hairy, the lower lip pinched together in the middle, beyond which it angles sharply downward and splits into two lobes, each with a purple spot in the middle. HABITAT: Moist, fertile soil in sunlit to partially shaded disturbed ground such as lawns, yards, parks, trail- sides, orchards. Introduced. FOOD USE: Gather the tender stems and greens by plucking or cutting in early spring-preferably before any flowers open. Their flavor is mild and the texture pleasant-good but not exceptional as a nibble, in salad, or as a potherb. COMMENTS: Abundant in many urban and rural areas, these pretty little weeds are easy-to-locate springtime edibles for the backyard forager. Interestingly, the plant produces some self-pollinating flowers with smaller corollas that do not open. 