(Mint
fam
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES
SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC PAIRED,
4
Woundwort
3
2
Stachys palustris (species complex)
Lamiaceae (Mint family)
depressed QUICK CHECK: Hairy stem with sessile, hairy, blunt toothed leaves with
veins; pink flowers in spaced whorls subtended by a pair of leaves ID difficulty deeply 2.
DESCRIPTION: and Perennial herb spreading by rhizome to form loose colonies. Rhizomes
narrow with thinner and thicker sections; the enlarged portion is 3-9 mm thick long
(slightly thicker than the lower stems), unbranched, whitish, brittle, mostly smooth but
with occasional roots and faintly constricted rings that are associated with tiny, triangular,
scale-like leaves. Stems 14-40" (36-100 cm) tall and 3-7 mm thick, single, erect, squared, hollow with thin
walls, the surface often purplish when young or near the base, densely hairy, especially on the angles, with
erect, straight, stiff hairs. Plants are usually unbranched but sometimes much-branched from near the base
on open, sunny shores. Shoots have narrower, blunt-pointed, nearly appressed leaves with tapered bases
and fewer teeth. Leaves paired, mostly sessile but sometimes with broadly channeled petioles to 25% of
blade length, widely-spaced, lanceolate to narrowly oblong, 1.5-3.5" (4-9 cm) long, the tip pointed and the
base broad. The upper surface is uniformly and densely covered with stiff hairs. Midvein, veins, and veinlets
are strongly depressed above and protruding below, making a highly corrugated surface. Margins have broad.
blunt, sometimes downturned teeth, each with a small dark spot on the tip. Inflorescence spikes with whorls
of 4-6 on the upper stem, separated by small gaps, evenly spaced at maturity, each whorl subtended by a
pair of reduced leaves. Flowers (mid summer) 8-13 mm long, the corolla hairy, pink and white (whiter inside)
mottled with darker purple spots, with two lips. The lower lip is longer and much broader with 3 lobes a: the
end; the upper lip is 2-lobed. Calyx of 4 nearly regular lobes, turning purple and then brown after flowering,
holding 4 ovate black seeds about 1.5 mm long.
CONFUSING PLANTS: American germander Teucrium canadense is a mint of dry savannahs with dense, soft
hairs on its surfaces, giving them a grayish look. The spike is uninterrupted, and the flowers lack an upper lip.
HABITAT: Moist open or semi-open sites. Floodplain forests, wet meadows, lake and pond edges, ditcnes.
Native.
FOOD USE: Dig rhizomes from fall through spring; they are brittle and break easily. They are delicious raw
or cooked. Tender shoots can also be eaten in spring, raw or cooked. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: Woundwort is widespread and common and produces two good edible parts. Formerly
considered a single species, this group (species complex)
shows multiple chromosome counts and has been divided by
taxonomists into several similar species. Size and hairiness
vary between populations, but the overall form of the groupis
recognizable. AKA hedge-nettle. Hyssop hedge-nettle S. hys-
sopifolia is generally too small to warrant collection; it grows
in wet, sandy, acidic soil.
535
(Mint fam BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC PAIRED, 4 Woundwort 3 2 Stachys palustris (species complex) Lamiaceae (Mint family) depressed QUICK CHECK: Hairy stem with sessile, hairy, blunt toothed leaves with veins; pink flowers in spaced whorls subtended by a pair of leaves ID difficulty deeply 2. DESCRIPTION: and Perennial herb spreading by rhizome to form loose colonies. Rhizomes narrow with thinner and thicker sections; the enlarged portion is 3-9 mm thick long (slightly thicker than the lower stems), unbranched, whitish, brittle, mostly smooth but with occasional roots and faintly constricted rings that are associated with tiny, triangular, scale-like leaves. Stems 14-40" (36-100 cm) tall and 3-7 mm thick, single, erect, squared, hollow with thin walls, the surface often purplish when young or near the base, densely hairy, especially on the angles, with erect, straight, stiff hairs. Plants are usually unbranched but sometimes much-branched from near the base on open, sunny shores. Shoots have narrower, blunt-pointed, nearly appressed leaves with tapered bases and fewer teeth. Leaves paired, mostly sessile but sometimes with broadly channeled petioles to 25% of blade length, widely-spaced, lanceolate to narrowly oblong, 1.5-3.5" (4-9 cm) long, the tip pointed and the base broad. The upper surface is uniformly and densely covered with stiff hairs. Midvein, veins, and veinlets are strongly depressed above and protruding below, making a highly corrugated surface. Margins have broad. blunt, sometimes downturned teeth, each with a small dark spot on the tip. Inflorescence spikes with whorls of 4-6 on the upper stem, separated by small gaps, evenly spaced at maturity, each whorl subtended by a pair of reduced leaves. Flowers (mid summer) 8-13 mm long, the corolla hairy, pink and white (whiter inside) mottled with darker purple spots, with two lips. The lower lip is longer and much broader with 3 lobes a: the end; the upper lip is 2-lobed. Calyx of 4 nearly regular lobes, turning purple and then brown after flowering, holding 4 ovate black seeds about 1.5 mm long. CONFUSING PLANTS: American germander Teucrium canadense is a mint of dry savannahs with dense, soft hairs on its surfaces, giving them a grayish look. The spike is uninterrupted, and the flowers lack an upper lip. HABITAT: Moist open or semi-open sites. Floodplain forests, wet meadows, lake and pond edges, ditcnes. Native. FOOD USE: Dig rhizomes from fall through spring; they are brittle and break easily. They are delicious raw or cooked. Tender shoots can also be eaten in spring, raw or cooked. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: Woundwort is widespread and common and produces two good edible parts. Formerly considered a single species, this group (species complex) shows multiple chromosome counts and has been divided by taxonomists into several similar species. Size and hairiness vary between populations, but the overall form of the groupis recognizable. AKA hedge-nettle. Hyssop hedge-nettle S. hys- sopifolia is generally too small to warrant collection; it grows in wet, sandy, acidic soil. 535 