3 Florida betony
3
2
QUICK Stachys CHECK: Short, erect, colony forming mint with lanceolate, blunt, round-toothed
floridana
Lamiaceae
(Mint
family)
leaves, Perennial spreading by rhizomes to form colonies. Rhizomes mm) thin long and
2-lipped light pink flowers. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: spaced nodes, producing blunt white tubers 0.7-1.2" (18-30 often decum-
white. rooting at smooth but with a few deep transverse constrictions. Stems hollow,
bent in winter, erect unbranched, in the surface purplish or green, sparsely to heart-shaped hairy-more at the so base, on
and 6-14 mm thick. spring, 8-20" (20-50 cm) tall and 2-4 mm thick, square, moderately
thin-walled, Leaves usually paired, narrowly ovate to lanceolate with a blunt tip, truncate to often purple with broad,
the angles. mm) long, sparsely to moderately short-hairy on both sides. Margins few and arching.
0.7-2.5" (18-65 teeth. Midvein, veins, and veinlets are depressed; secondary veins are angle to the stem,
blunt, nipple-tipped straight, hairy, shallowly channeled, uniform in width, at a nearly right terminal spike, the
Petioles of narrow, blade length on lower leaves, shortening greatly near the top. Inflorescence a
60-90% in whorls of 4-9 in the axils of reduced, crowded leaf pairs. Flowers (mid to late spring) 9-11 The mm lower long.
flowers Corolla 2-lipped, pale pink to nearly white with darker pink mottling. The upper lip is hood-like. lip
is 3-lobed with 3 broken stripes, the middle lobe much larger and rounded. Stamens 4-5, ascending under the
upper lip but not surpassing it. Calyx bell-like, green, hairy, about 40% as long as the corolla, with 5 pointed
lobes nearly equal in size. Seeds dark brown.
HABITAT: Disturbed sandy soil with ample sun: forest edges, disturbed open woods, roadsides, lawns,
fields. Native.
FOOD USE: Collect tubers any time (but they are lowest in quality at
peak green growth, when they are easiest to find). They are delicious
raw or cooked and are reported to make good pickles. Young shoots/
greens, collected in spring from plants before flowering, can be eaten raw
or cooked. Lawn plants usually have lame little tubers. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: This is a close relative of a cultivated vegetable, Stachys
affinis, called "crosne" or "Chinese artichoke," which is probably not
popular here because English speakers hate trying to pronounce its French
name. Crosnes have similar tubers that are not quite as good as Florida
betony, and can occasionally be found at high prices in grocery stores.
The hautest cuisine is free and fun.
3 Florida betony 3 2 QUICK Stachys CHECK: Short, erect, colony forming mint with lanceolate, blunt, round-toothed floridana Lamiaceae (Mint family) leaves, Perennial spreading by rhizomes to form colonies. Rhizomes mm) thin long and 2-lipped light pink flowers. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: spaced nodes, producing blunt white tubers 0.7-1.2" (18-30 often decum- white. rooting at smooth but with a few deep transverse constrictions. Stems hollow, bent in winter, erect unbranched, in the surface purplish or green, sparsely to heart-shaped hairy-more at the so base, on and 6-14 mm thick. spring, 8-20" (20-50 cm) tall and 2-4 mm thick, square, moderately thin-walled, Leaves usually paired, narrowly ovate to lanceolate with a blunt tip, truncate to often purple with broad, the angles. mm) long, sparsely to moderately short-hairy on both sides. Margins few and arching. 0.7-2.5" (18-65 teeth. Midvein, veins, and veinlets are depressed; secondary veins are angle to the stem, blunt, nipple-tipped straight, hairy, shallowly channeled, uniform in width, at a nearly right terminal spike, the Petioles of narrow, blade length on lower leaves, shortening greatly near the top. Inflorescence a 60-90% in whorls of 4-9 in the axils of reduced, crowded leaf pairs. Flowers (mid to late spring) 9-11 The mm lower long. flowers Corolla 2-lipped, pale pink to nearly white with darker pink mottling. The upper lip is hood-like. lip is 3-lobed with 3 broken stripes, the middle lobe much larger and rounded. Stamens 4-5, ascending under the upper lip but not surpassing it. Calyx bell-like, green, hairy, about 40% as long as the corolla, with 5 pointed lobes nearly equal in size. Seeds dark brown. HABITAT: Disturbed sandy soil with ample sun: forest edges, disturbed open woods, roadsides, lawns, fields. Native. FOOD USE: Collect tubers any time (but they are lowest in quality at peak green growth, when they are easiest to find). They are delicious raw or cooked and are reported to make good pickles. Young shoots/ greens, collected in spring from plants before flowering, can be eaten raw or cooked. Lawn plants usually have lame little tubers. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: This is a close relative of a cultivated vegetable, Stachys affinis, called "crosne" or "Chinese artichoke," which is probably not popular here because English speakers hate trying to pronounce its French name. Crosnes have similar tubers that are not quite as good as Florida betony, and can occasionally be found at high prices in grocery stores. The hautest cuisine is free and fun. 