STEMS SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC PAIRED,
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES
6 Bugleweed 2
NG-393
genus
Lycopus
(in
part)
Lamiaceae (Mint family)
of nearly regular flowers in the leaf axils. ID difficulty 3.
UICK tiny, CHECK: Non-aromatic mints with coarsely toothed leaves and
Tubers DESCRIPTION: 0.5-3" Perennial herbs without a strong scent, spreading
regularly (13-80 mm) long, narrow, tapered at both ends, usually by short rhizomes
bud constricted, the surface otherwise mostly smooth and whitish curved. some kinds
a erect, or thin compact shoot at the tip. Stems single to few, 10-40" (25-100 cm) or greenish, tall. with
with few branches (2-4 mm) in proportion to the height, hairless or faintly soft-hairy, usually squared,
0.8-4" a (2-10 where competition is low. Leaves sessile or nearly so, paired, lanceolate simple to but occasionally
hairs. cm) long, tapered to a point at both ends but not sharp at the tip. Surface hairless narrowly elliotic,
faintly. sparse Midvein and secondary veins depressed above and protruding below; veinlets or with soft.
Margins with 4-8 medium to large teeth per side, widely spaced and blunt or nipple-tipped. depressed Inflores- only
cence a tightly-packed cluster of tiny sessile flowers in the leaf axils, all along the stem except sometimes the
lowest part. Flowers (throughout summer) 2-4 mm across and 4-6 mm long, the calyx with 4-5 nearly equal
lobes and 4-5 major veins. Corolla whitish, tubular, not 2-lipped, with 4-5 nearly equal lobes (when only 4 the
upper lobe is slightly larger and notched). Fruit is a tiny dry capsule. LYDS frail but easy to distinguish by the
small spaced clusters of persistent calyxes.
CONFUSING SPECIES: Not all members of this genus have tubers. Lycopus americanus is a very common
species without tubers: it can be told apart by the elongated lobe-teeth on its leaves.
WARNING! Bugleweed often grows beside water hemlock (see 668 and p.13), which is deadly. The plants
do not look similar at all except possibly for the small. single roots of water hemlock seedlings. Water hemlock
roots have faint yellow lines inside plus a stronger scent; bugleweed tubers lack yellow lines inside and have
a smoother and glossier surface.
HABITAT: Wet soil or shallow water, usually in
moderate shade. Lakeshores, marshes. stream
edges, springs, fens, ponds (often on mossy
or mucky logs or stones). Native.
FOOD USE: Tubers are usually very close
to the surface and close to the parent plant:
you can often get them out easily with your
fingers. Gather them from fall through early
spring. They can be eaten raw or cooked. Con-
servation 3.
(Continued on the next page.)
Northern bugleweed it wet most
(es.
found
in
oot
shady
commo 419 small with small tubers.
spec
537
STEMS SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC PAIRED, BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES 6 Bugleweed 2 NG-393 genus Lycopus (in part) Lamiaceae (Mint family) of nearly regular flowers in the leaf axils. ID difficulty 3. UICK tiny, CHECK: Non-aromatic mints with coarsely toothed leaves and Tubers DESCRIPTION: 0.5-3" Perennial herbs without a strong scent, spreading regularly (13-80 mm) long, narrow, tapered at both ends, usually by short rhizomes bud constricted, the surface otherwise mostly smooth and whitish curved. some kinds a erect, or thin compact shoot at the tip. Stems single to few, 10-40" (25-100 cm) or greenish, tall. with with few branches (2-4 mm) in proportion to the height, hairless or faintly soft-hairy, usually squared, 0.8-4" a (2-10 where competition is low. Leaves sessile or nearly so, paired, lanceolate simple to but occasionally hairs. cm) long, tapered to a point at both ends but not sharp at the tip. Surface hairless narrowly elliotic, faintly. sparse Midvein and secondary veins depressed above and protruding below; veinlets or with soft. Margins with 4-8 medium to large teeth per side, widely spaced and blunt or nipple-tipped. depressed Inflores- only cence a tightly-packed cluster of tiny sessile flowers in the leaf axils, all along the stem except sometimes the lowest part. Flowers (throughout summer) 2-4 mm across and 4-6 mm long, the calyx with 4-5 nearly equal lobes and 4-5 major veins. Corolla whitish, tubular, not 2-lipped, with 4-5 nearly equal lobes (when only 4 the upper lobe is slightly larger and notched). Fruit is a tiny dry capsule. LYDS frail but easy to distinguish by the small spaced clusters of persistent calyxes. CONFUSING SPECIES: Not all members of this genus have tubers. Lycopus americanus is a very common species without tubers: it can be told apart by the elongated lobe-teeth on its leaves. WARNING! Bugleweed often grows beside water hemlock (see 668 and p.13), which is deadly. The plants do not look similar at all except possibly for the small. single roots of water hemlock seedlings. Water hemlock roots have faint yellow lines inside plus a stronger scent; bugleweed tubers lack yellow lines inside and have a smoother and glossier surface. HABITAT: Wet soil or shallow water, usually in moderate shade. Lakeshores, marshes. stream edges, springs, fens, ponds (often on mossy or mucky logs or stones). Native. FOOD USE: Tubers are usually very close to the surface and close to the parent plant: you can often get them out easily with your fingers. Gather them from fall through early spring. They can be eaten raw or cooked. Con- servation 3. (Continued on the next page.) Northern bugleweed it wet most (es. found in oot shady commo 419 small with small tubers. spec 537 