STEMS BASAL SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY ANOMATIC
LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAINED,
3
5
Hemp-nettle Galeopsis tetrahit Lamiaceae (Mint family)
QUICK CHECK: Very stiff-hairy, non-aromatic mint with swellings below the nodes,
toothed leaves, and spiny bracts when fruiting. ID difficulty 2.
Weedy annual. Many parts of the plant have hairs of 2 distinct kinds: long,
DESCRIPTION: stiff, and needle-like, and gland-tipped hairs about half as long. Stems 20-40" (50-100 in erect cm)
tall and 3-8 mm thick, erect, simple or branchy, taller than wide, densely covered cm)
hairs, hollow, with a distinct swelling below each node. Leaves ovate, 1.5-4" (4-10
long, the green, tips long-pointed but not particularly sharp, angled at the base, the surfaces densely to sparsely
covered with leaning hair. Midvein deeply depressed above. Secondary veins 7-10 per side (a large number
for the mint family), deeply depressed above, running nearly straight and unbroken to a notch between teeth;
veinlets are depressed more lightly. Margins have broad, blunt teeth. Petioles deeply channeled, ranging
from 60% of blade length on lower leaves to 20% on the upper stem. Inflorescence whorls of several sessile
flowers in the axils of often reduced upper leaves. Flowers (mid summer) 8-11 mm long, the calyx with 5 long,
sharp lobes that stiffen into prickly spines after flowering. Corolla much longer than the calyx, whitish to pink
with darker pink or purple lines, the tip with a hairy hood covering the sexual parts and a 3-lobed lower lip.
Capsule contains 4 dark brown seeds 2-3 mm long, each shaped somewhat like a plum pit.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Often mistaken for stinging nettle before flowering, but Galeopsis stems have sharper
corners and the sides lack deep grooves, plus the hairs do not sting.
HABITAT: Disturbed soil, especially where moist, in full sun to moderate shade. Gardens, barnyards, road-
sides. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Gather seeds in late summer as they darken and become loose in their capsules. Lean the
plants over a container and strike or shake them with a gloved hand. Gather from still-green plants with green
bracts-brown ones have already dropped their good seed. Look for
dark seeds; light brown ones are empty. Sift out insects and trash, then
Galeopsis tetrahit seeds in hand.
use the seeds in baking or hot cereal. The young greens in spring have
a mild flavor reminiscent of purple dead-nettle.
COMMENTS: This plant is not a nettle, nor a hemp. Its greens have
often been eaten by confused foragers and are apparently safe but not
particularly good. The seeds of hemp-nettle have been found in ancient
European archaeological sites where they were apparently stored
in large quan-
tities as food.
They are oily
and have a
delicious, nutty
taste-in both
form and flavor
reminiscent
of hemp seed
The similarity
of the seeds
appears to be
the most likely
explanation for
the name, and
hints at more
widespread
use in the past.
There are some
dubious reports
of the loxicity of
these seeds
336
STEMS BASAL SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY ANOMATIC LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAINED, 3 5 Hemp-nettle Galeopsis tetrahit Lamiaceae (Mint family) QUICK CHECK: Very stiff-hairy, non-aromatic mint with swellings below the nodes, toothed leaves, and spiny bracts when fruiting. ID difficulty 2. Weedy annual. Many parts of the plant have hairs of 2 distinct kinds: long, DESCRIPTION: stiff, and needle-like, and gland-tipped hairs about half as long. Stems 20-40" (50-100 in erect cm) tall and 3-8 mm thick, erect, simple or branchy, taller than wide, densely covered cm) hairs, hollow, with a distinct swelling below each node. Leaves ovate, 1.5-4" (4-10 long, the green, tips long-pointed but not particularly sharp, angled at the base, the surfaces densely to sparsely covered with leaning hair. Midvein deeply depressed above. Secondary veins 7-10 per side (a large number for the mint family), deeply depressed above, running nearly straight and unbroken to a notch between teeth; veinlets are depressed more lightly. Margins have broad, blunt teeth. Petioles deeply channeled, ranging from 60% of blade length on lower leaves to 20% on the upper stem. Inflorescence whorls of several sessile flowers in the axils of often reduced upper leaves. Flowers (mid summer) 8-11 mm long, the calyx with 5 long, sharp lobes that stiffen into prickly spines after flowering. Corolla much longer than the calyx, whitish to pink with darker pink or purple lines, the tip with a hairy hood covering the sexual parts and a 3-lobed lower lip. Capsule contains 4 dark brown seeds 2-3 mm long, each shaped somewhat like a plum pit. CONFUSING PLANTS: Often mistaken for stinging nettle before flowering, but Galeopsis stems have sharper corners and the sides lack deep grooves, plus the hairs do not sting. HABITAT: Disturbed soil, especially where moist, in full sun to moderate shade. Gardens, barnyards, road- sides. Introduced. FOOD USE: Gather seeds in late summer as they darken and become loose in their capsules. Lean the plants over a container and strike or shake them with a gloved hand. Gather from still-green plants with green bracts-brown ones have already dropped their good seed. Look for dark seeds; light brown ones are empty. Sift out insects and trash, then Galeopsis tetrahit seeds in hand. use the seeds in baking or hot cereal. The young greens in spring have a mild flavor reminiscent of purple dead-nettle. COMMENTS: This plant is not a nettle, nor a hemp. Its greens have often been eaten by confused foragers and are apparently safe but not particularly good. The seeds of hemp-nettle have been found in ancient European archaeological sites where they were apparently stored in large quan- tities as food. They are oily and have a delicious, nutty taste-in both form and flavor reminiscent of hemp seed The similarity of the seeds appears to be the most likely explanation for the name, and hints at more widespread use in the past. There are some dubious reports of the loxicity of these seeds 336 