SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC PAIRED,
LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES
7
Stinging nettle
3
Urtica
dioica
FH-170
Urticaceae (Nettle family)
stinging JICK CHECK: hairs, tiny Tall, erect, mostly unbranched herb with lanceolate, leaves.
unshowy flowers, and four grooves in its stem. ID difficulty paired
DESCRIPTION: parts are armed Perennial herb forming colonies by thin, pale rhizomes 2.
plant has with stinging, needle-like hairs-more so in full Above-ground
tall, with blunt a musky odor. especially when young. Stems not clumped, sun or on richer soil. The
cut or corners and 4 deep, narrow grooves, mostly unbranched unless erect, the 3-10 (1-3 m)
ous, paired, toppled. (Branches are minor if present, sometimes producing greatly reduced plants are
green and rough, evenly-spaced, the nearly uniform in size, 3-6" (8-15 cm) long, broadly ovate leaves.) to Leaves numer-
tips long-pointed to blunt. (The first leaves of shoots are broader and blunter lanceo than ate older tark
leaves.) Both surfaces have erect, needle-like stinging
hairs, but these are more prominent on major veins
and are smaller and sparser above. Midvein deeply
depressed above and protruding below. There are 2-6
major secondary veins from the base, plus a few more
arising distally on the midvein, also deeply depressed.
giving a pleated appearance. Veinlets are depressed
but less so. Margins have large, sharp teeth, often
double-toothed. Petioles 40-80% of the blade length.
grooved on top. Stipules narrow and tapered 1cm
straight-edged, minutely wavy. Flowers tiny, greenish.
inconspicuous, clustered along short stems hanging
from leaf axils from early to late summer.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Wood nettle (p. 609) has
broader, alternate leaves; false nettle (p. 561) has no
stinging hairs. Mint family members such as wound-
wort (p. 535) and hemp-nettle (p. 536) have sharp-
cornered stems and pinnate secondary veins; they
lack stingers and have larger, tubular flowers.
HABITAT: Rich, moist soil with high nitrogen in full to
partial sun, especially where occasional disturbances
occur. Most commonly in floodplains, ditches, barn-
yards, field edges, moist meadows, openings or trails
in rich hardwood forests, and along waterways. Native
FOOD USE: Gather tender leafy tops in spring, using
gloves if desired to prevent getting stung. Briefly poil-
ing or steaming destroys the capacity to sting. Use
the cooked greens as you would spinach. The cooking
water makes an excellent tea (or if salted. broth).
Older leaves become tough but remain suitable for
tea or broth. The young leaves are easy to dry for
future use. A new flush of growth usually appears
in autumn. but tends to be of lesser quality than the
spring growth. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: Common. widespread. and well-liked
this plant IS often erroneously reported as not native.
Nettle greens are extremely nutritious and high in
protein Because patches are highly productive, sting-
nettles are difficult to overharvest. This incredibly
useful ing plant also produces a strong fiber that has been of
employed for cordage and textiles for thousands
years (Continued on the next page.)
539
SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC PAIRED, LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES 7 Stinging nettle 3 Urtica dioica FH-170 Urticaceae (Nettle family) stinging JICK CHECK: hairs, tiny Tall, erect, mostly unbranched herb with lanceolate, leaves. unshowy flowers, and four grooves in its stem. ID difficulty paired DESCRIPTION: parts are armed Perennial herb forming colonies by thin, pale rhizomes 2. plant has with stinging, needle-like hairs-more so in full Above-ground tall, with blunt a musky odor. especially when young. Stems not clumped, sun or on richer soil. The cut or corners and 4 deep, narrow grooves, mostly unbranched unless erect, the 3-10 (1-3 m) ous, paired, toppled. (Branches are minor if present, sometimes producing greatly reduced plants are green and rough, evenly-spaced, the nearly uniform in size, 3-6" (8-15 cm) long, broadly ovate leaves.) to Leaves numer- tips long-pointed to blunt. (The first leaves of shoots are broader and blunter lanceo than ate older tark leaves.) Both surfaces have erect, needle-like stinging hairs, but these are more prominent on major veins and are smaller and sparser above. Midvein deeply depressed above and protruding below. There are 2-6 major secondary veins from the base, plus a few more arising distally on the midvein, also deeply depressed. giving a pleated appearance. Veinlets are depressed but less so. Margins have large, sharp teeth, often double-toothed. Petioles 40-80% of the blade length. grooved on top. Stipules narrow and tapered 1cm straight-edged, minutely wavy. Flowers tiny, greenish. inconspicuous, clustered along short stems hanging from leaf axils from early to late summer. CONFUSING PLANTS: Wood nettle (p. 609) has broader, alternate leaves; false nettle (p. 561) has no stinging hairs. Mint family members such as wound- wort (p. 535) and hemp-nettle (p. 536) have sharp- cornered stems and pinnate secondary veins; they lack stingers and have larger, tubular flowers. HABITAT: Rich, moist soil with high nitrogen in full to partial sun, especially where occasional disturbances occur. Most commonly in floodplains, ditches, barn- yards, field edges, moist meadows, openings or trails in rich hardwood forests, and along waterways. Native FOOD USE: Gather tender leafy tops in spring, using gloves if desired to prevent getting stung. Briefly poil- ing or steaming destroys the capacity to sting. Use the cooked greens as you would spinach. The cooking water makes an excellent tea (or if salted. broth). Older leaves become tough but remain suitable for tea or broth. The young leaves are easy to dry for future use. A new flush of growth usually appears in autumn. but tends to be of lesser quality than the spring growth. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: Common. widespread. and well-liked this plant IS often erroneously reported as not native. Nettle greens are extremely nutritious and high in protein Because patches are highly productive, sting- nettles are difficult to overharvest. This incredibly useful ing plant also produces a strong fiber that has been of employed for cordage and textiles for thousands years (Continued on the next page.) 539 