Taxonomists have long debated
whether they should split this
plant into multiple species (in
which case you will find our
native stinging nettle designated
U. gracilis) or lump all regional
populations together under the
name U. dioica. In any case, all
members of this "species com-
plex" are similarly edible. The
oft-repeated warning about older
leaves becoming unsafe for tea
should be ignored.
Related edibles:
Ball-head nettle
Urtica chamaedryoides
This is a native annual of disturbed,
rich sites in forests or barnyards of
the South, attaining heights of up
to 2' (60 cm) on flimsy stems often
supported by surrounding vegeta-
tion. It often has multiple stems or
branches from the base, and the leaves are broadly ova
to nearly triangular. The flower clusters are nearly sphe
cal. AKA heart-leaf nettle, weak nettle, dwarf nettle. TI
greens can be used like those of stinging nettle, but tl
growth is never as tender, rapid, or voluminous.
Dog nettle
Urtica urens
An annual introduced from
Europe, this plant is found
in moist, disturbed, shaded
soil. It is spottily distrib-
uted, mostly in the southern
states. 11 has broad, closely-spaced leaves and rarely
exceeds 20" (50 cm) in height, but is otherwise very
similar to stinging nettle and can be used similarly.
However, smaller since it IS an annual, the tender portion
540
Taxonomists have long debated whether they should split this plant into multiple species (in which case you will find our native stinging nettle designated U. gracilis) or lump all regional populations together under the name U. dioica. In any case, all members of this "species com- plex" are similarly edible. The oft-repeated warning about older leaves becoming unsafe for tea should be ignored. Related edibles: Ball-head nettle Urtica chamaedryoides This is a native annual of disturbed, rich sites in forests or barnyards of the South, attaining heights of up to 2' (60 cm) on flimsy stems often supported by surrounding vegeta- tion. It often has multiple stems or branches from the base, and the leaves are broadly ova to nearly triangular. The flower clusters are nearly sphe cal. AKA heart-leaf nettle, weak nettle, dwarf nettle. TI greens can be used like those of stinging nettle, but tl growth is never as tender, rapid, or voluminous. Dog nettle Urtica urens An annual introduced from Europe, this plant is found in moist, disturbed, shaded soil. It is spottily distrib- uted, mostly in the southern states. 11 has broad, closely-spaced leaves and rarely exceeds 20" (50 cm) in height, but is otherwise very similar to stinging nettle and can be used similarly. However, smaller since it IS an annual, the tender portion 540 