1cm
STEMS SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC PAIRED,
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES
8 Virginia meadow beauty
2
Rhexia virginica
2
family Melastomataceae
QUICK th winged CHECK: Paired, sessile leaves with 3 main veins and tiny teeth; stems squared
angles. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: point at both Perennial herb spreading by rhizome. Tubers tooth-like,
ends, 0.6-1.0" (15-25 mm) long, firm and crisp, with a thin black tapering to a
light grayish flesh. Stems erect, or creeping and rooting at the nodes before skin and
sometimes with multiple branches from the base, delicate, to 30" (75 cm) tall turning and erect,
thick, scarcely tapered, simple or with a few branches, squared and winged on the angles, 3 mm
the wings with long, gland-tipped hairs. Stems become rough with age. Leaves sessile,
paired, 0.8-2.5" (2-6 cm) long, ovate to lanceolate, pointed at the tip, rounded at the base, surfaces rough
and bristly with scattered long hairs. Veins mostly obscure, but there is one prominent vein on each side of
the midvein, all three strongly depressed above and protruding below; the outer veins arise at the base and
arch back toward the midvein to almost meet near the leaf tip. A faint vein is sometimes visible just inside the
margin. Margins have widely spaced tiny teeth with bristle-tips. Inflorescence a terminal umbei-like or bifur-
:
cating cluster with a few to several flowers, the junctures with reduced leaves. Flowers (all summer) with a
tubular green calyx 0.6-0.8" (15-20 mm) long, bulged at the base and flared into 4 triangular lobes at the tip
Corolla spreads 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) wide with 4 broad, very thin, pink to purple petals. The flowers are turned to
the side and the sexual parts, especially the long style, droop over the lower petal. The yellow anthers are long and
banana-shaped or hooked, attached near the end rather than the middle. Fruit is a persistent vase-shaped capsule.
HABITAT: Margins of moderately acidic wetlands on sand: ditches, ponds, wet meadows. and low spots in
sandy woods. Full sun to moderate shade. Usually not in sphagnum bogs. Native.
FOOD USE: Tubers are crisp and slightly tangy, but tiny and hard to
gather in quantity. Collect tender young leaves and growing tips in
spring or early summer, before they get too tough and raspy. They have
a tangy flavor and are best raw as a salad or nibble. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: Occasionally common, this dainty herb is a pleasant
nibble and rarely more-it does not often warrant collection in any
volume. Other members of this genus are reported 01 presumed to
be edible but I have not tried them.
54'
1cm STEMS SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC PAIRED, BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES 8 Virginia meadow beauty 2 Rhexia virginica 2 family Melastomataceae QUICK th winged CHECK: Paired, sessile leaves with 3 main veins and tiny teeth; stems squared angles. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: point at both Perennial herb spreading by rhizome. Tubers tooth-like, ends, 0.6-1.0" (15-25 mm) long, firm and crisp, with a thin black tapering to a light grayish flesh. Stems erect, or creeping and rooting at the nodes before skin and sometimes with multiple branches from the base, delicate, to 30" (75 cm) tall turning and erect, thick, scarcely tapered, simple or with a few branches, squared and winged on the angles, 3 mm the wings with long, gland-tipped hairs. Stems become rough with age. Leaves sessile, paired, 0.8-2.5" (2-6 cm) long, ovate to lanceolate, pointed at the tip, rounded at the base, surfaces rough and bristly with scattered long hairs. Veins mostly obscure, but there is one prominent vein on each side of the midvein, all three strongly depressed above and protruding below; the outer veins arise at the base and arch back toward the midvein to almost meet near the leaf tip. A faint vein is sometimes visible just inside the margin. Margins have widely spaced tiny teeth with bristle-tips. Inflorescence a terminal umbei-like or bifur- : cating cluster with a few to several flowers, the junctures with reduced leaves. Flowers (all summer) with a tubular green calyx 0.6-0.8" (15-20 mm) long, bulged at the base and flared into 4 triangular lobes at the tip Corolla spreads 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) wide with 4 broad, very thin, pink to purple petals. The flowers are turned to the side and the sexual parts, especially the long style, droop over the lower petal. The yellow anthers are long and banana-shaped or hooked, attached near the end rather than the middle. Fruit is a persistent vase-shaped capsule. HABITAT: Margins of moderately acidic wetlands on sand: ditches, ponds, wet meadows. and low spots in sandy woods. Full sun to moderate shade. Usually not in sphagnum bogs. Native. FOOD USE: Tubers are crisp and slightly tangy, but tiny and hard to gather in quantity. Collect tender young leaves and growing tips in spring or early summer, before they get too tough and raspy. They have a tangy flavor and are best raw as a salad or nibble. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: Occasionally common, this dainty herb is a pleasant nibble and rarely more-it does not often warrant collection in any volume. Other members of this genus are reported 01 presumed to be edible but I have not tried them. 54' 