BASAL LEAVES ABSENT,
STEMS SQUARE, NOT STRO
9
Giant St. John's wort
2
Hypericum
ascryon
family
Hypericaceae
QUICK CHECK: Tall, clumped, erect stems with thin, blunt, entire leaves; large, yellow,
5-petaled flowers. ID difficulty 2.
Perennial herb from rhizomes. Stems clumped, 3-6' (1-2 m) tall but and not
DESCRIPTION: thick, erect, straight, smooth, hairless, somewhat squared, branching than wide.
4-7 mm the base, the branches strongly ascending, the form always much taller ascending
leaves. Leaves paired, ovate to lanceolate, clasping, entire, very thin and soft, smooth, completely hairless,
Shoots near purple-tinted with faint bloom, definitely squared, with overlapping,
2-4" (5-10 cm) long; the tips are tapered to a point, not acuminate. Midvein slightly depressed above and
protruding below. There are usually 3 secondary veins per side, diverging at 45° to the midvein; these and
veinlets are nearly flat above. All of the veins stand out from light color. Inflorescence a forking cluster of sev-
eral flowers, only a few blooming at once. Flowers (mid summer) about 2" (5 cm) across, with 5 bright yellow
petals at least twice as long as wide, above a calyx of 5 triangular sepals that partly overlap at the base. The
flowers have 5 styles and several dozen stamens. As they age, the petals roll up to one side. Fruit is a pyramidal
or conical capsule 0.6-1" (15-25 mm) long, held erect, green at first but eventually turning brown and woody,
longer than wide, holding numerous tiny seeds, splitting open into 5 lobes at maturity. LYDS prominent, stiff
and hard with reddish-brown papery bark.
HABITAT: Rich soil, moist but not swampy, in full to partial sun. Floodplains, beaver meadows, tallgrass
prairies, oak savannahs, old fields and pastures, ditches, brushy areas, hardwood forest clearings. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender shoots, which appear in mid spring, can be eaten raw or cooked. I strip off the leaves and
eat only the stems, because they taste much better. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This circumpolar species has the unique piney flavor characteristic of other St. John's worts, but
milder. Although traditionally used as food in Asia, it probably contains some hypericin, which causes photo-
sensitivity in some people; it may also be mildly psychoactive. Eat in moderation. Although widespread, this
beautiful plant is often sparse-but colonies respond well to tending and seeding. AKA Hypericum pyramidatum.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS SQUARE, NOT STRO 9 Giant St. John's wort 2 Hypericum ascryon family Hypericaceae QUICK CHECK: Tall, clumped, erect stems with thin, blunt, entire leaves; large, yellow, 5-petaled flowers. ID difficulty 2. Perennial herb from rhizomes. Stems clumped, 3-6' (1-2 m) tall but and not DESCRIPTION: thick, erect, straight, smooth, hairless, somewhat squared, branching than wide. 4-7 mm the base, the branches strongly ascending, the form always much taller ascending leaves. Leaves paired, ovate to lanceolate, clasping, entire, very thin and soft, smooth, completely hairless, Shoots near purple-tinted with faint bloom, definitely squared, with overlapping, 2-4" (5-10 cm) long; the tips are tapered to a point, not acuminate. Midvein slightly depressed above and protruding below. There are usually 3 secondary veins per side, diverging at 45° to the midvein; these and veinlets are nearly flat above. All of the veins stand out from light color. Inflorescence a forking cluster of sev- eral flowers, only a few blooming at once. Flowers (mid summer) about 2" (5 cm) across, with 5 bright yellow petals at least twice as long as wide, above a calyx of 5 triangular sepals that partly overlap at the base. The flowers have 5 styles and several dozen stamens. As they age, the petals roll up to one side. Fruit is a pyramidal or conical capsule 0.6-1" (15-25 mm) long, held erect, green at first but eventually turning brown and woody, longer than wide, holding numerous tiny seeds, splitting open into 5 lobes at maturity. LYDS prominent, stiff and hard with reddish-brown papery bark. HABITAT: Rich soil, moist but not swampy, in full to partial sun. Floodplains, beaver meadows, tallgrass prairies, oak savannahs, old fields and pastures, ditches, brushy areas, hardwood forest clearings. Native. FOOD USE: Tender shoots, which appear in mid spring, can be eaten raw or cooked. I strip off the leaves and eat only the stems, because they taste much better. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This circumpolar species has the unique piney flavor characteristic of other St. John's worts, but milder. Although traditionally used as food in Asia, it probably contains some hypericin, which causes photo- sensitivity in some people; it may also be mildly psychoactive. Eat in moderation. Although widespread, this beautiful plant is often sparse-but colonies respond well to tending and seeding. AKA Hypericum pyramidatum. 