10 Purple loosestrife
1
1
Lythrum salicaria Lythraceae (Loosestrife family)
QUICK tire leaves CHECK: and Tall, clumped, square-stemmed wetland plant with paired, sessile
showy spikes of purple flowers. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: suckers. Stems Perennial from a woody crown, spreading only short distances
with clumped, to 6' (2 m) tall and 0.6" (15 mm) thick, straight, by root
has a tiny wing on the angles, hairless or with sparse, soft hairs, solid. The erect, squared
the form many strongly ascending branches, especially where the plants are not top half often
remains taller than wide. LYDS prominent, stiff, light brownish-gray, crowded, often but
hairless, usually paired but occasionally in whorls of 3, 1.3-4.5" (3.3-11 cm) long, ascending, lanceolate, curving. Leaves sessile.
the bases rounded to heart-shaped, tapered to a sharp tip, the margins entire. Midvein and soft-hairy to
veins are lightly depressed above. Leaves get progressively smaller toward the top. Inflorescence interrupted secondary
terminal spikes to 18" (46 cm) long, the flowers in small clumps in the axils of reduced leaves. those at the
bottom of the spike blooming first. Lower inflorescence leaves are paired; upper ones are alternate Flow-
ers (July-September) 0.6-0.8" (15-20 mm) across with a green, hairy, tubular or bell-like calyx with 4-8 short,
pointed, triangular lobes. There are 8-16 stamens and a single pistil. Petals 4-8 (usually 5-6), purple with
a prominent darker vein in the center, wrinkled or ruffled, narrowed at the base and broad at the tip, more
than twice as long as wide, spreading, not touching each other. Fruit a capsule 6 mm long with 2 chambers
containing numerous tiny seeds.
HABITAT: Wetlands in full sun. Marshes, lake and pond margins, ditches, rocky riverbanks. Occasionally
upland on disturbed soil. Introduced. I
FOOD USE: Young shoots and attached leaves can be eaten cooked as a potherb. The flowers can also be
eaten as a garnish or used to impart color to infusions and confections.
COMMENTS: These greens are not all that good, but they have been recorded as a wild vegetable in Europe
for a long time. Purple loosestrife is absolutely striking when it blooms in late summer and was once widely
planted as an ornamental. Unfortunately it reproduces rapidly and is highly invasive; it has taken over vast
wetland areas to the near exclusion of other plants. There have been intensive efforts to eradicate the plant
from these habitats, including hand-pulling, chemical warfare, and the introduction of a beetle that feeds on
it. Nevertheless it remains abundant in many areas.
543
10 Purple loosestrife 1 1 Lythrum salicaria Lythraceae (Loosestrife family) QUICK tire leaves CHECK: and Tall, clumped, square-stemmed wetland plant with paired, sessile showy spikes of purple flowers. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: suckers. Stems Perennial from a woody crown, spreading only short distances with clumped, to 6' (2 m) tall and 0.6" (15 mm) thick, straight, by root has a tiny wing on the angles, hairless or with sparse, soft hairs, solid. The erect, squared the form many strongly ascending branches, especially where the plants are not top half often remains taller than wide. LYDS prominent, stiff, light brownish-gray, crowded, often but hairless, usually paired but occasionally in whorls of 3, 1.3-4.5" (3.3-11 cm) long, ascending, lanceolate, curving. Leaves sessile. the bases rounded to heart-shaped, tapered to a sharp tip, the margins entire. Midvein and soft-hairy to veins are lightly depressed above. Leaves get progressively smaller toward the top. Inflorescence interrupted secondary terminal spikes to 18" (46 cm) long, the flowers in small clumps in the axils of reduced leaves. those at the bottom of the spike blooming first. Lower inflorescence leaves are paired; upper ones are alternate Flow- ers (July-September) 0.6-0.8" (15-20 mm) across with a green, hairy, tubular or bell-like calyx with 4-8 short, pointed, triangular lobes. There are 8-16 stamens and a single pistil. Petals 4-8 (usually 5-6), purple with a prominent darker vein in the center, wrinkled or ruffled, narrowed at the base and broad at the tip, more than twice as long as wide, spreading, not touching each other. Fruit a capsule 6 mm long with 2 chambers containing numerous tiny seeds. HABITAT: Wetlands in full sun. Marshes, lake and pond margins, ditches, rocky riverbanks. Occasionally upland on disturbed soil. Introduced. I FOOD USE: Young shoots and attached leaves can be eaten cooked as a potherb. The flowers can also be eaten as a garnish or used to impart color to infusions and confections. COMMENTS: These greens are not all that good, but they have been recorded as a wild vegetable in Europe for a long time. Purple loosestrife is absolutely striking when it blooms in late summer and was once widely planted as an ornamental. Unfortunately it reproduces rapidly and is highly invasive; it has taken over vast wetland areas to the near exclusion of other plants. There have been intensive efforts to eradicate the plant from these habitats, including hand-pulling, chemical warfare, and the introduction of a beetle that feeds on it. Nevertheless it remains abundant in many areas. 543 