STEMS SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC PAIRED,
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES
12 Romerillo
2
Bidens alba
Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK CHECK: Low plant with wide-spreading branches, leaves montly
needles. ID difficulty 1.
, -5 leaflets, flowers composite with a yellow center and white seads compound
DESCRIPTION: Annual, often spreading low and wide before standing erect,
to 4' (1.2 m) tall when leaning on other vegetation, but usually much shorter, occasionally sometimes
flowering at 4" (10 cm). Stems tough and stiff, to 6 mm thick, squarish or strongly angled. deoply grooved above
the petioles (especially on young plants), convex on the non-petiole stem faces, solid with a pinhole hollow,
the surface green when young, developing purple lines with age, bearing soft hair mostly on the angles
Branches profuse, usually widely angled near the base but less 50 above, with long internodes on upper
branches. Leaves paired, the first ones simple but later leaves compound with 30rs leaflets. Petiole 30-50%
of blade length, much shorter on upper branches, deeply wing-channeled with hairs along the margins. Leaf-
lets (especially terminal) may be deeply lobed; otherwise they are ovate to lanceolate with pointed tips. They
are sessile, semi-sessile, or with a narrow, decurrent base. Blades are flat and thin with erect, soft. fine hairs on
both sides, especially the veins. Midvein green, raised in a gentle valley above, protruding below; secondary
veins several, broadly angled, flat to faintly raised above and slightly protruding below. Margins have mod-
erately broad, sharp teeth with claw tips. Inflorescence dichotomously or ternately branched loose clusters.
the branches long and straight, with simple leaves at the junctures. Heads 0.7-1.4" (18-35 mm) across, each
with a ring of ovate bracts with maroon tips behind it. Rays usually 5-7, white with broad tips and maroon veins
visible on the back. The rays are not symmetrically arranged and it often appears as if one is missing. Disk /el-
low with 2-3 dozen tiny florets. Fruits black and needle-like, 1 cm long, with 3-4 mm barbed prongs di the tip
HABITAT: Disturbed soil in full to partial sunlight. Roadsides, urban lots, lawns, shores, sidewalks Native
FOOD USE: Tender young leaves have a peculiar but not unpleasant flavor, rather strong, and can be eaten raw
or cooked. The flowerheads have a strong marigold-like flavor and are an excellent seasoning. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Like its close relative listed next, this is a common tropical weed across the world and (sividery
eaten as a potherb. It is available almost year-round in warmer locations near the Gulf Coast. and everyone
in such locations has easy access to it. AKA beggar's ticks, Spanish needles, buttertly needles. Bidens
STEMS SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC PAIRED, BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES 12 Romerillo 2 Bidens alba Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK CHECK: Low plant with wide-spreading branches, leaves montly needles. ID difficulty 1. , -5 leaflets, flowers composite with a yellow center and white seads compound DESCRIPTION: Annual, often spreading low and wide before standing erect, to 4' (1.2 m) tall when leaning on other vegetation, but usually much shorter, occasionally sometimes flowering at 4" (10 cm). Stems tough and stiff, to 6 mm thick, squarish or strongly angled. deoply grooved above the petioles (especially on young plants), convex on the non-petiole stem faces, solid with a pinhole hollow, the surface green when young, developing purple lines with age, bearing soft hair mostly on the angles Branches profuse, usually widely angled near the base but less 50 above, with long internodes on upper branches. Leaves paired, the first ones simple but later leaves compound with 30rs leaflets. Petiole 30-50% of blade length, much shorter on upper branches, deeply wing-channeled with hairs along the margins. Leaf- lets (especially terminal) may be deeply lobed; otherwise they are ovate to lanceolate with pointed tips. They are sessile, semi-sessile, or with a narrow, decurrent base. Blades are flat and thin with erect, soft. fine hairs on both sides, especially the veins. Midvein green, raised in a gentle valley above, protruding below; secondary veins several, broadly angled, flat to faintly raised above and slightly protruding below. Margins have mod- erately broad, sharp teeth with claw tips. Inflorescence dichotomously or ternately branched loose clusters. the branches long and straight, with simple leaves at the junctures. Heads 0.7-1.4" (18-35 mm) across, each with a ring of ovate bracts with maroon tips behind it. Rays usually 5-7, white with broad tips and maroon veins visible on the back. The rays are not symmetrically arranged and it often appears as if one is missing. Disk /el- low with 2-3 dozen tiny florets. Fruits black and needle-like, 1 cm long, with 3-4 mm barbed prongs di the tip HABITAT: Disturbed soil in full to partial sunlight. Roadsides, urban lots, lawns, shores, sidewalks Native FOOD USE: Tender young leaves have a peculiar but not unpleasant flavor, rather strong, and can be eaten raw or cooked. The flowerheads have a strong marigold-like flavor and are an excellent seasoning. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Like its close relative listed next, this is a common tropical weed across the world and (sividery eaten as a potherb. It is available almost year-round in warmer locations near the Gulf Coast. and everyone in such locations has easy access to it. AKA beggar's ticks, Spanish needles, buttertly needles. Bidens 