STEMS BASAL SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC
LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED,
11
Stitchwort
3
IWE-90
Stellaria graminea, S. longifolia
Caryophyllaceae (Pink family)
Mat-forming plant with sharply angled stems; narrow leaves and thread-like. extremely
depressed QUICK CHECK in the enter with downcur margins; flowering stems tall
ID difficulty 1.
Perennial with a creeping, vegetative growth phase and an erect, fall flower- and
DESCRIPTION: phase. The creeping phase forms dense mats with closely-spaced nodes in wing
early each spring. angle, hairless. In cold weather the stems are trailing to weakly erect; during summer the for flowering
mg Stems to 32" (8o cm) long and 1 mm thick, 4-angled with a very narrow
stems on long with widely spaced nodes, erect at first but later leaning on nearby vegetation support.
Leaves grow paired, sessile, 0.3~1.1" (8-28 mm) long, narrowly lanceolate to linear, pointed, with a maroon nipple
when young, the blade often curving up, down, or to one side. There are sometimes minute hairs on the
margins of the leaf base; otherwise the blade is hairless. Midvein deeply depressed with the blade curved
downward on each side; smaller veins not visible. Inflorescence small, loose, spreading clusters at the top of
the plant, with very thin pedicels. There are tiny, sharp-tipped bracts at junctures in the cluster. Flowers (late
spring to early summer) 8-12 mm across with 5 white petals, each split to the base, making it appear as 10 pet-
als at a glance. The sharp-tipped green sepals have
prominent ridges and are about as long as the petals.
HABITAT: Moist soil in full sun to partial shade.
Lawns, fields, meadows, pastures, roadsides, shores,
stream banks. S. longifolia is considered native; S. gra-
minea might be native or introduced. Conservation 1.
FOOD USE: When spring mats first start to turn
upright, grab small clumps and cut the tender leafy
tips with scissors. They make a tasty nibble or salad
ingredient. Older stems are very tough.
COMMENTS: Little known despite being incredibly
common, this unobtrusive chickweed is excellent.
However, it is small and quickly becomes tough
by flowering. The listed species are nearly identi-
cal, and there are several additional native ones.
AKA starwort.
544
STEMS BASAL SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY AROMATIC LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED, 11 Stitchwort 3 IWE-90 Stellaria graminea, S. longifolia Caryophyllaceae (Pink family) Mat-forming plant with sharply angled stems; narrow leaves and thread-like. extremely depressed QUICK CHECK in the enter with downcur margins; flowering stems tall ID difficulty 1. Perennial with a creeping, vegetative growth phase and an erect, fall flower- and DESCRIPTION: phase. The creeping phase forms dense mats with closely-spaced nodes in wing early each spring. angle, hairless. In cold weather the stems are trailing to weakly erect; during summer the for flowering mg Stems to 32" (8o cm) long and 1 mm thick, 4-angled with a very narrow stems on long with widely spaced nodes, erect at first but later leaning on nearby vegetation support. Leaves grow paired, sessile, 0.3~1.1" (8-28 mm) long, narrowly lanceolate to linear, pointed, with a maroon nipple when young, the blade often curving up, down, or to one side. There are sometimes minute hairs on the margins of the leaf base; otherwise the blade is hairless. Midvein deeply depressed with the blade curved downward on each side; smaller veins not visible. Inflorescence small, loose, spreading clusters at the top of the plant, with very thin pedicels. There are tiny, sharp-tipped bracts at junctures in the cluster. Flowers (late spring to early summer) 8-12 mm across with 5 white petals, each split to the base, making it appear as 10 pet- als at a glance. The sharp-tipped green sepals have prominent ridges and are about as long as the petals. HABITAT: Moist soil in full sun to partial shade. Lawns, fields, meadows, pastures, roadsides, shores, stream banks. S. longifolia is considered native; S. gra- minea might be native or introduced. Conservation 1. FOOD USE: When spring mats first start to turn upright, grab small clumps and cut the tender leafy tips with scissors. They make a tasty nibble or salad ingredient. Older stems are very tough. COMMENTS: Little known despite being incredibly common, this unobtrusive chickweed is excellent. However, it is small and quickly becomes tough by flowering. The listed species are nearly identi- cal, and there are several additional native ones. AKA starwort. 544 