BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED,
STEMS SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY
13 Spanish needles
Bidens bipinnata Asteraceae 2 (Composite family)
stemmed erect herb with paired leaves that are twice ID difficulty pinnately 1.
divided: QUICK CHECK: vellow flowerheads Square: produce dark, 4-pronged, needle-like seeds. at
DESCRIPTION: tall and lanky in competition. Stem square with finely with the or ridges
Warm-weather annual, 1-5' (30-150 cm) tall; spreading grooved and bushy ridged
sides, to 1 cm often thick, very Branches in the axils of large leaves, spreading to ascending again and often pinnately compound lobed
maturity in full sun, tough, hairless or with scattered tiny hairs, green
darkened, once purple. pinnately compound, then divided to deeply dissected, sometimes cm) long, the lobes
Leaves paired, long internodes, sometimes with alternate leaves. Blades 2-8" (5-20 smooth and hairless to
Upper stems pointed have (except the terminal lobe, which is long-tapered) with a claw-tip, Midvein flat to raised
abruptly hairy above; they may have scattered stiff hairs below, especially on the veins. of blade
minutely and slightly protruding below; secondary veins raised above and flat below. Petioles 30-90% rachis divi-
above length (shorter toward the top), deeply channeled and slightly winged; wings widen after each
sion. Inflorescence (July-October) scattered solitary heads at the ends of long, stiff, straight, thin, angled
peduncles to 5" (13 cm) long. Heads are 9-11 mm long, spreading 5-8 mm wide, erect in flower and fruit (not
nodding like some Bidens), surrounded by several linear to lanceolate appressed bracts, a few extending
down the peduncle. There are usually 3-5 broad, yellow, notched rays; and always 12-27 tiny, yellow, 5-lobed
disk florets. Fruits spread at maturity in an umbel-like or
sunburst-like cluster, the achenes needle-like, dark brown,
mottled, strongly ridged, 0.4-0.6" (10-15 mm) long, the tips
with 4 barbed prongs 3-4 mm long, by which the seeds stick
to fur and clothing.
HABITAT: Prefers moist to dry disturbed rich soil in semi-
shade: Rocky wooded slopes, floodplain forests, stream banks,
gardens, crop fields, pastures, orchards, urban woodlots.
Native.
FOOD USE: Tender greens can be eaten raw or cooked from
early summer to early fall. The flowerheads have a marigold-
like flavor and can be used as a seasoning (though it is weaker
than romerillo). Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Spanish needles has tender young greens in
mid to late summer when most other plants are old and tough,
making it especially nice when you need a flavorful dash of
green in a dish. This species is abundant and widespread in
our region. It is also native to Southeast Asia and possibly
elsewhere; it is now a cosmopolitan weed through most of the
warm parts of the world, where it is commonly eaten. It has
probably remained so little known in North American foraging
circles because it was not widely eaten in Europe.
546
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES PAIRED, STEMS SQUARE, NOT STRONGLY 13 Spanish needles Bidens bipinnata Asteraceae 2 (Composite family) stemmed erect herb with paired leaves that are twice ID difficulty pinnately 1. divided: QUICK CHECK: vellow flowerheads Square: produce dark, 4-pronged, needle-like seeds. at DESCRIPTION: tall and lanky in competition. Stem square with finely with the or ridges Warm-weather annual, 1-5' (30-150 cm) tall; spreading grooved and bushy ridged sides, to 1 cm often thick, very Branches in the axils of large leaves, spreading to ascending again and often pinnately compound lobed maturity in full sun, tough, hairless or with scattered tiny hairs, green darkened, once purple. pinnately compound, then divided to deeply dissected, sometimes cm) long, the lobes Leaves paired, long internodes, sometimes with alternate leaves. Blades 2-8" (5-20 smooth and hairless to Upper stems pointed have (except the terminal lobe, which is long-tapered) with a claw-tip, Midvein flat to raised abruptly hairy above; they may have scattered stiff hairs below, especially on the veins. of blade minutely and slightly protruding below; secondary veins raised above and flat below. Petioles 30-90% rachis divi- above length (shorter toward the top), deeply channeled and slightly winged; wings widen after each sion. Inflorescence (July-October) scattered solitary heads at the ends of long, stiff, straight, thin, angled peduncles to 5" (13 cm) long. Heads are 9-11 mm long, spreading 5-8 mm wide, erect in flower and fruit (not nodding like some Bidens), surrounded by several linear to lanceolate appressed bracts, a few extending down the peduncle. There are usually 3-5 broad, yellow, notched rays; and always 12-27 tiny, yellow, 5-lobed disk florets. Fruits spread at maturity in an umbel-like or sunburst-like cluster, the achenes needle-like, dark brown, mottled, strongly ridged, 0.4-0.6" (10-15 mm) long, the tips with 4 barbed prongs 3-4 mm long, by which the seeds stick to fur and clothing. HABITAT: Prefers moist to dry disturbed rich soil in semi- shade: Rocky wooded slopes, floodplain forests, stream banks, gardens, crop fields, pastures, orchards, urban woodlots. Native. FOOD USE: Tender greens can be eaten raw or cooked from early summer to early fall. The flowerheads have a marigold- like flavor and can be used as a seasoning (though it is weaker than romerillo). Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Spanish needles has tender young greens in mid to late summer when most other plants are old and tough, making it especially nice when you need a flavorful dash of green in a dish. This species is abundant and widespread in our region. It is also native to Southeast Asia and possibly elsewhere; it is now a cosmopolitan weed through most of the warm parts of the world, where it is commonly eaten. It has probably remained so little known in North American foraging circles because it was not widely eaten in Europe. 546 