AM
1cm
L'LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE
GROUP 33 BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE,
LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE
A few distinct families of plants compose group 33. The edible parts produced are not very
diverse, consisting almost entirely of greens, shoots, flowers, buds, and pods. The plants
i. this group are generally fairly easy for beginners to recognize, with the exception that
milkweed shoots can easily be confused with those of dogbane.
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 33
The key is not your final answer!
Stems trailing, creeping, decumbent, or reclining; if erect, weakly and inconsistently so.
Leaves thick and succulent.
Leaves broad and ovate, the members of the pair similar in size.
1. Seabeach sandwort
Leaves long and narrow, often mismatched in size.
or
Leaves green and somewhat glossy; coastal.
2. Sea-pursiane
Leaves gray-green and dull; mostly inland.
3. Western sea-purslane
Leaves thin and delicate.
Some stems with a line of fine hairs on one side only.
or
Flowers less than 8 mm across with petals shorter than sepais.
4. Common chickweed
or
5. Star chickweed
Flowers more than 1 cm across, petals much longer than sepais.
All stems either hairless or hairy all around (hairs never in a line).
Stems and leaves hairless or with very short, soft, woolly hair.
6. Water chickweed
Leaves ovate, acute-pointed; petals longer than sepals.
or
Leaves roundish, abruptly nipple-tipped; petals shorter than sepals.
8. Drymary
7. Mouse-ear chickweed
Stems and leaves densely covered with long, stiff hair.
generally erect and self-supporting (although possibly toppling with age).
9. Devil's claw
Lower leaves paired, upper leaves alternate; surfaces sticky-hairy-smelly.
Lower leaves paired, upper leaves packed into whorls. Swedish bunchberry (p. 507).
All leaves paired (except occasionally alternate near the flowers): not sticky-hairy-smelly.
Stems less than 4 mm thick: sap not milky.
10. Woodland phiox
Stems not branched. leaves faintly hairy, flowers blue.
11. Prairie phiox
or
Stems often branched, leaves densely hairy, flowers purple.
Stems more than 1 cm thick; sap milky.
in branchy clusters; pods needle-like. Dogbanes (poisonous, p. thick. 675).
Flowers Flewers in umbels; pods pointed but not needle-like, more than 12 mm
Stems covered with very fine, short, soft wool; leaves abruptly pointed.
Flower densely crown longer then the central structure; Crown and petals pinkish-purple.
12. Common milkweed
Crown points not curved, clearly shorter than petals.
13. Showy milkweed
or
Flower Crown crown equal to or shorter than the central structure, usually smooth. pale.
points curved, elongated, about equal to petals.
14. Green milkweed
or
pressed against the central structure: pod
15. Sand milkweed
Crown Crown points points not pressed against the central structure: pod densely woolly.
16. Poke milkweed
Stams very sparsely woolly: leaves with long-pointed tips.
AM 1cm L'LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE GROUP 33 BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE A few distinct families of plants compose group 33. The edible parts produced are not very diverse, consisting almost entirely of greens, shoots, flowers, buds, and pods. The plants i. this group are generally fairly easy for beginners to recognize, with the exception that milkweed shoots can easily be confused with those of dogbane. TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 33 The key is not your final answer! Stems trailing, creeping, decumbent, or reclining; if erect, weakly and inconsistently so. Leaves thick and succulent. Leaves broad and ovate, the members of the pair similar in size. 1. Seabeach sandwort Leaves long and narrow, often mismatched in size. or Leaves green and somewhat glossy; coastal. 2. Sea-pursiane Leaves gray-green and dull; mostly inland. 3. Western sea-purslane Leaves thin and delicate. Some stems with a line of fine hairs on one side only. or Flowers less than 8 mm across with petals shorter than sepais. 4. Common chickweed or 5. Star chickweed Flowers more than 1 cm across, petals much longer than sepais. All stems either hairless or hairy all around (hairs never in a line). Stems and leaves hairless or with very short, soft, woolly hair. 6. Water chickweed Leaves ovate, acute-pointed; petals longer than sepals. or Leaves roundish, abruptly nipple-tipped; petals shorter than sepals. 8. Drymary 7. Mouse-ear chickweed Stems and leaves densely covered with long, stiff hair. generally erect and self-supporting (although possibly toppling with age). 9. Devil's claw Lower leaves paired, upper leaves alternate; surfaces sticky-hairy-smelly. Lower leaves paired, upper leaves packed into whorls. Swedish bunchberry (p. 507). All leaves paired (except occasionally alternate near the flowers): not sticky-hairy-smelly. Stems less than 4 mm thick: sap not milky. 10. Woodland phiox Stems not branched. leaves faintly hairy, flowers blue. 11. Prairie phiox or Stems often branched, leaves densely hairy, flowers purple. Stems more than 1 cm thick; sap milky. in branchy clusters; pods needle-like. Dogbanes (poisonous, p. thick. 675). Flowers Flewers in umbels; pods pointed but not needle-like, more than 12 mm Stems covered with very fine, short, soft wool; leaves abruptly pointed. Flower densely crown longer then the central structure; Crown and petals pinkish-purple. 12. Common milkweed Crown points not curved, clearly shorter than petals. 13. Showy milkweed or Flower Crown crown equal to or shorter than the central structure, usually smooth. pale. points curved, elongated, about equal to petals. 14. Green milkweed or pressed against the central structure: pod 15. Sand milkweed Crown Crown points points not pressed against the central structure: pod densely woolly. 16. Poke milkweed Stams very sparsely woolly: leaves with long-pointed tips. 