BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE
Seabeach sandwort
2
1
Honckenya peploides Caryophyllaceae (Pink family)
QUICK CHECK: Mat-forming seashore herb with succulent stems and paired,
succulent leaves; flowers with 5 white petals. ID difficulty 1.
Perennial often forming large, dense mats over seashore and rocks 14"
DESCRIPTION: beaches. Non-flowering stems are thick and succulent, to 6 mm thick The
and cm) tall, decumbent to leaning or prostrate-more erect in dense clumps. tints in
surface (36 is hairless, smooth, light (nearly white) in the shade but with purple
sunlight. Branches are uncommon; if present they are minor and and axillary. Leaves
paired, spaced 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) on the lower stem but crowded near the tip. The blades are glossy, elliptic to
obovate, succulent, clasping, to 1" (2.5 cm) long, abruptly pointed, slightly cupped, the margins entire. Midvein
may be flat or slightly depressed or raised; other veins are not evident. Flowering stems thinner and creeping or
decumbent, forking, with 2 shallow grooves on opposite sides; the grooves switch sides after each node. Flowers
10-12 mm across, with 5 broadly elliptic white, almost translucent petals, each well separated on a long stalk.
A calyx of 5 triangular sepals spreads a bit beyond the petals. Stamens spread about as far as the petals.
HABITAT: Rocky, gravelly, or sandy ocean beaches. Native.
FOOD USE: The leaves and stem tips remain succulent and tender through the growing season and can be
gathered all summer and eaten raw as a snack, in salads,
or cooked as a vegetable. These are traditionally mixed
with other vegetables and fermented for storage by
peoples of the Far North.
COMMENTS: Non-flowering plants I have tried in sev-
eral locations tasted like a non-tangy or slightly bland
purslane. I have only seen it blooming once, in northern
Newfoundland, and that plant tasted like slightly salty
fish-flavored chickweed, which was pretty good once I
got past the weirdness of it. Some botanists have split
Honckenya peploides into 2 or more species, in which
case the fishy flowering plant I ate from might have
been H. diffusa. Interestingly, there were non-flowering,
bländ-tasting colonies a few feet away. 1 have not had
sufficient experience with these plants to develop an
opinion on the taxonomy.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE Seabeach sandwort 2 1 Honckenya peploides Caryophyllaceae (Pink family) QUICK CHECK: Mat-forming seashore herb with succulent stems and paired, succulent leaves; flowers with 5 white petals. ID difficulty 1. Perennial often forming large, dense mats over seashore and rocks 14" DESCRIPTION: beaches. Non-flowering stems are thick and succulent, to 6 mm thick The and cm) tall, decumbent to leaning or prostrate-more erect in dense clumps. tints in surface (36 is hairless, smooth, light (nearly white) in the shade but with purple sunlight. Branches are uncommon; if present they are minor and and axillary. Leaves paired, spaced 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) on the lower stem but crowded near the tip. The blades are glossy, elliptic to obovate, succulent, clasping, to 1" (2.5 cm) long, abruptly pointed, slightly cupped, the margins entire. Midvein may be flat or slightly depressed or raised; other veins are not evident. Flowering stems thinner and creeping or decumbent, forking, with 2 shallow grooves on opposite sides; the grooves switch sides after each node. Flowers 10-12 mm across, with 5 broadly elliptic white, almost translucent petals, each well separated on a long stalk. A calyx of 5 triangular sepals spreads a bit beyond the petals. Stamens spread about as far as the petals. HABITAT: Rocky, gravelly, or sandy ocean beaches. Native. FOOD USE: The leaves and stem tips remain succulent and tender through the growing season and can be gathered all summer and eaten raw as a snack, in salads, or cooked as a vegetable. These are traditionally mixed with other vegetables and fermented for storage by peoples of the Far North. COMMENTS: Non-flowering plants I have tried in sev- eral locations tasted like a non-tangy or slightly bland purslane. I have only seen it blooming once, in northern Newfoundland, and that plant tasted like slightly salty fish-flavored chickweed, which was pretty good once I got past the weirdness of it. Some botanists have split Honckenya peploides into 2 or more species, in which case the fishy flowering plant I ate from might have been H. diffusa. Interestingly, there were non-flowering, bländ-tasting colonies a few feet away. 1 have not had sufficient experience with these plants to develop an opinion on the taxonomy. 