1cm
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE
2
Sea-purslane
3
Sesuvium portulacastrum family Aizoaceae
QUICK aves in CHECK: pairs of Long, unequal succulent, size. ID difficulty vine-like 1. stems growing near heaches, with alliptic
DESCRIPTION: Stems creeping, Perennial forming mats, all parts hairless,
section with to 8' (2.4 m) long, uniform in thickness, solid, thick, and succulent
mixed with other a tougher core, the surface smooth, hairless, brownish roundish, red to layered in cross
ground. Branches vegetation the stems may stand weakly erect and reach green. Where
Leaves paired, the occasional at about 45°, the tips often ascending few 3' (1 m) off the
but succulent. Midvein elliptic, pointed at both ends, entire, 0,8-1,7" (20-43 mm) long larger than the other
Blades narrowly node thickened with a darkened ring; one member a of the inches. pair notably Internodes 3 5" (8-13 cm).
ers single from leaf faint; other veins obscure. Petioles 15-20% of blade length, and 5-12 mm wide, "lattish
identical axils, 0.5-0.7" (13-18 mm) across, on pedicels 6-8 mm long, the sheathing petals friangular. the stem not Flow- of
width, light purple inside and green on the back. The stamens are numerous.
HABITAT: Seashores, salt marshes, mud flats; occasionally on beaches inland. Native.
FOOD USE: The tender stem tips and leaves are pleasantly salty and can be eaten raw or cooked year-round.
Some overwintering leaves become enlarged and are especially good. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This seashore vegetable is a locally abundant, irresistible nibble. Annual sea-pursiane $ man
timum is much less common, and I have not eaten it. It is a smaller plant with broader leaves and smaler
white flowers.
Sesuvium portulacastrum colony
Related edible:
Western sea-purslane
Sesuvium verrucosum
CAN
This species inhabits salt flats and basins at
scattered locations inland. It is a smaller. more
upright plant with smaller, more crowded leaves
that are made gray by a bumpy-sparkly coating
The flowers are purple. This species is not quite
as good to eat as its coastal cousin. but still
makes a nice salty nibble.
549
1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE 2 Sea-purslane 3 Sesuvium portulacastrum family Aizoaceae QUICK aves in CHECK: pairs of Long, unequal succulent, size. ID difficulty vine-like 1. stems growing near heaches, with alliptic DESCRIPTION: Stems creeping, Perennial forming mats, all parts hairless, section with to 8' (2.4 m) long, uniform in thickness, solid, thick, and succulent mixed with other a tougher core, the surface smooth, hairless, brownish roundish, red to layered in cross ground. Branches vegetation the stems may stand weakly erect and reach green. Where Leaves paired, the occasional at about 45°, the tips often ascending few 3' (1 m) off the but succulent. Midvein elliptic, pointed at both ends, entire, 0,8-1,7" (20-43 mm) long larger than the other Blades narrowly node thickened with a darkened ring; one member a of the inches. pair notably Internodes 3 5" (8-13 cm). ers single from leaf faint; other veins obscure. Petioles 15-20% of blade length, and 5-12 mm wide, "lattish identical axils, 0.5-0.7" (13-18 mm) across, on pedicels 6-8 mm long, the sheathing petals friangular. the stem not Flow- of width, light purple inside and green on the back. The stamens are numerous. HABITAT: Seashores, salt marshes, mud flats; occasionally on beaches inland. Native. FOOD USE: The tender stem tips and leaves are pleasantly salty and can be eaten raw or cooked year-round. Some overwintering leaves become enlarged and are especially good. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This seashore vegetable is a locally abundant, irresistible nibble. Annual sea-pursiane $ man timum is much less common, and I have not eaten it. It is a smaller plant with broader leaves and smaler white flowers. Sesuvium portulacastrum colony Related edible: Western sea-purslane Sesuvium verrucosum CAN This species inhabits salt flats and basins at scattered locations inland. It is a smaller. more upright plant with smaller, more crowded leaves that are made gray by a bumpy-sparkly coating The flowers are purple. This species is not quite as good to eat as its coastal cousin. but still makes a nice salty nibble. 549 