BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES
CHICKWEED
IWE-90
genus Stellaria (in part)
Caryophyllaceae
(Pink
family)
GROUP ID: I ow creeping or lax plants with non-tapered stems, paired entire leaves, and flowers
QUICK white petals deeply cut to look like 10. ID difficulty 2.
withs ennial or annual herbs, often branched heavily at or near and non-flowering the base and sometimes (cool) periods rooting and
DESCRIPTION: different growth forms during flowering (hot) and crowded leaves
from nodes. like They have different very plants: Cool weather plants have broader, larger, form mats, more rarely more than
can look entirely erect, especially where crowded, often spreading or creeping to not
Stems weakly cm) high, 1-3 mm thick, nearly uniform in thickness along their length, round, delicate, in line becoming side
18" (46 branching dichotomously especially toward the tips. Several species have hairs a be on one of
the woody, stem only. Leaves paired, entire, ovate to lanceolate, thin and delicate. Upper leaves may sessile while
lower leaves may have petioles up to 100% of blade length. Midveins depressed, not distinctly offset by
color. Secondary veins faintly evident, faintly depressed, 40-60° to the midvein, 2-3 arising on each side of
it. Inflorescence a loose, spreading, cluster from branch tips or leaf axils, often forking dichotomously. Flow-
ers 3-20 mm across with 5 narrow, triangular, green sepais and 5 white petals, each split to the base, giving the
appearance of 10 narrow petals. (Flowers occasionally lack petals.) Fruit a tiny oval capsule that splits open at
maturity to release several brown seeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Scarlet pimpernel, Anagallis arvensis has a twisted, hairless stem with four unequal
winged angles. All the leaves are sessile, the major secondary veins all arise at or near the base, and the blade
is minutely dotted below. The flowers are red.
FOOD USE: Collect leafy greens from young stems that are still tender-not from flowering branches. These
are most abundant during the cool periods of spring and fall. Use in salads, as a raw nibble, or cooked. The
mild flavor reminds people of corn silk.
COMMENTS: Those chickweeds considered annuals sometimes stay green and half-alive under snow or
through deep frost and continue growing the next season. There are numerous species of chickweed in our
area; below I cover a few of the largest or most common.
is
Common chickweed
Stellaria media
3
QUICK CHECK: Chickweed with broad, ovate leaves, hairy on only one side of stem.
and DESCRIPTION: rounded, Annual, often forming dense, lush clumps in cool weather.
only-the to 32" (80 cm) long, some internodes with a dense of hairs Stems thin
toward the base (5-50 mm) long, the upper nearly sessile, but triangular to ovate
or broadly hairy elliptic, side 0.2-2" sometimes switching between nodes, Leaves hairless, row on one side
of the year) tiny, of in the clus- plant. Petioles broadly U-channeled with hairy margins. the petioles Flower longer (most
ters of up to 7, the sepals
3-6 mm long and hairy,
the petals sometimes
absent; if present shorter
than the sepals (1-4 mm).
There are 3-5 stamens
HABITAT: Disturbed,
moist, shaded areas,
such as along house
foundations and wood
land trails, in flower
gardens, shady dite lies,
backyards, weedy dita:
Considered introduced
but possibly Native
550
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES CHICKWEED IWE-90 genus Stellaria (in part) Caryophyllaceae (Pink family) GROUP ID: I ow creeping or lax plants with non-tapered stems, paired entire leaves, and flowers QUICK white petals deeply cut to look like 10. ID difficulty 2. withs ennial or annual herbs, often branched heavily at or near and non-flowering the base and sometimes (cool) periods rooting and DESCRIPTION: different growth forms during flowering (hot) and crowded leaves from nodes. like They have different very plants: Cool weather plants have broader, larger, form mats, more rarely more than can look entirely erect, especially where crowded, often spreading or creeping to not Stems weakly cm) high, 1-3 mm thick, nearly uniform in thickness along their length, round, delicate, in line becoming side 18" (46 branching dichotomously especially toward the tips. Several species have hairs a be on one of the woody, stem only. Leaves paired, entire, ovate to lanceolate, thin and delicate. Upper leaves may sessile while lower leaves may have petioles up to 100% of blade length. Midveins depressed, not distinctly offset by color. Secondary veins faintly evident, faintly depressed, 40-60° to the midvein, 2-3 arising on each side of it. Inflorescence a loose, spreading, cluster from branch tips or leaf axils, often forking dichotomously. Flow- ers 3-20 mm across with 5 narrow, triangular, green sepais and 5 white petals, each split to the base, giving the appearance of 10 narrow petals. (Flowers occasionally lack petals.) Fruit a tiny oval capsule that splits open at maturity to release several brown seeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: Scarlet pimpernel, Anagallis arvensis has a twisted, hairless stem with four unequal winged angles. All the leaves are sessile, the major secondary veins all arise at or near the base, and the blade is minutely dotted below. The flowers are red. FOOD USE: Collect leafy greens from young stems that are still tender-not from flowering branches. These are most abundant during the cool periods of spring and fall. Use in salads, as a raw nibble, or cooked. The mild flavor reminds people of corn silk. COMMENTS: Those chickweeds considered annuals sometimes stay green and half-alive under snow or through deep frost and continue growing the next season. There are numerous species of chickweed in our area; below I cover a few of the largest or most common. is Common chickweed Stellaria media 3 QUICK CHECK: Chickweed with broad, ovate leaves, hairy on only one side of stem. and DESCRIPTION: rounded, Annual, often forming dense, lush clumps in cool weather. only-the to 32" (80 cm) long, some internodes with a dense of hairs Stems thin toward the base (5-50 mm) long, the upper nearly sessile, but triangular to ovate or broadly hairy elliptic, side 0.2-2" sometimes switching between nodes, Leaves hairless, row on one side of the year) tiny, of in the clus- plant. Petioles broadly U-channeled with hairy margins. the petioles Flower longer (most ters of up to 7, the sepals 3-6 mm long and hairy, the petals sometimes absent; if present shorter than the sepals (1-4 mm). There are 3-5 stamens HABITAT: Disturbed, moist, shaded areas, such as along house foundations and wood land trails, in flower gardens, shady dite lies, backyards, weedy dita: Considered introduced but possibly Native 550 