BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE
COMMENTS: and Common chickweed is especially prevalent
like areas is an excellent salad green. Lesser chic kweed S. in urban
have a miniature version of common chickweed, but its flowers pallida is
, petals and most of them are self-pollinated and do not open carely
also possibly introduced.
5 Star chickweed Stellaria pubera
3
QUICK CHECK: Clump-forming chickweed with large, showy flowers; the upper leaves
hairy.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Stems to 22" (56 cm) long, rounded, often maroon, sometimes
numerous from the root crown giving a bushy appearance. Flowering stems have a row of
hairs on one side only. Leaves ovate to lanceolate, sessile (or tapered to a short, narrow,
petiole-like base) to 3.5" (9 cm) long, slightly hairy, especially on the margins of upper
leaves. Vegetative stems are erect and much larger, with larger leaves, and resemble honeysuckle shoots: they
usually have hair all around. Flowers abundant and showy, but only in spring, 11-14 mm across, the petals much
longer than the sepals and rounded or blunt.
HABITAT: Hardwood forests, well-drained with moderate shade,
especially oak-hickory. Native.
COMMENTS: Flowering stems quickly become tough, but very young
or non-flowering stems are as good as those of common chickweed.
AKA giant chickweed.
55¹
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE COMMENTS: and Common chickweed is especially prevalent like areas is an excellent salad green. Lesser chic kweed S. in urban have a miniature version of common chickweed, but its flowers pallida is , petals and most of them are self-pollinated and do not open carely also possibly introduced. 5 Star chickweed Stellaria pubera 3 QUICK CHECK: Clump-forming chickweed with large, showy flowers; the upper leaves hairy. DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Stems to 22" (56 cm) long, rounded, often maroon, sometimes numerous from the root crown giving a bushy appearance. Flowering stems have a row of hairs on one side only. Leaves ovate to lanceolate, sessile (or tapered to a short, narrow, petiole-like base) to 3.5" (9 cm) long, slightly hairy, especially on the margins of upper leaves. Vegetative stems are erect and much larger, with larger leaves, and resemble honeysuckle shoots: they usually have hair all around. Flowers abundant and showy, but only in spring, 11-14 mm across, the petals much longer than the sepals and rounded or blunt. HABITAT: Hardwood forests, well-drained with moderate shade, especially oak-hickory. Native. COMMENTS: Flowering stems quickly become tough, but very young or non-flowering stems are as good as those of common chickweed. AKA giant chickweed. 55¹ 