BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT
3
chickweed Stellaria aquatica
6 Water chickweed with long stems difficulty and large, 1. pointed leaves, the
DESCRIPTION: upper stems Trailing or decumbent perennial minutely herb with hairy thin on all rhizomes. sides-often Stems very rounded, densely
QUICK CHECK: hairv Mat-forming all around, the petal lobes pointed. ID
up to 44" (112 cm) long. They may be hairless the base) or to densely soft-hairy (near the flowers), of blade
toward the tips. Petioles Leaves hairless broadly channeled (near with long hairs on their Flowers margins, (summer to 100% to early
fall) length 9-13 near mm the across base; with leaves usually near 10 stamens, the petals greatly
ovate. pointed. flower clusters are sessile. exceeding the sepals.
HABITAT: Rich moist soil in shade. Backyards, gardens, forest
paths, woodland puddles, pond and brook edges. Introduced.
COMMENTS: This plant is similar to common chickweed but
larger and more robust; the flavor is almost as good. In some
regions water chickweed is much more abundant than common
chickweed, and it is frequently collected by foragers who assume
it is that species. AKA giant chickweed, Myosoton aquaticum.
Mouse-ear chickweed
&
Cerastium fontanum
1
QUICK CHECK:
Small chickweed
with very hairy
stems and broad,
very hairy leaves
with a bumpy
surface.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from
a tough root, often forming mats.
Stems multiple, creeping or decum-
bent, to 16" (40 cm) long and 2 mm
thick, hollow, often branched, red-
dish or striped with reddish and
green, evenly covered with long,
erect, straight, moderately stiff hairs.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT 3 chickweed Stellaria aquatica 6 Water chickweed with long stems difficulty and large, 1. pointed leaves, the DESCRIPTION: upper stems Trailing or decumbent perennial minutely herb with hairy thin on all rhizomes. sides-often Stems very rounded, densely QUICK CHECK: hairv Mat-forming all around, the petal lobes pointed. ID up to 44" (112 cm) long. They may be hairless the base) or to densely soft-hairy (near the flowers), of blade toward the tips. Petioles Leaves hairless broadly channeled (near with long hairs on their Flowers margins, (summer to 100% to early fall) length 9-13 near mm the across base; with leaves usually near 10 stamens, the petals greatly ovate. pointed. flower clusters are sessile. exceeding the sepals. HABITAT: Rich moist soil in shade. Backyards, gardens, forest paths, woodland puddles, pond and brook edges. Introduced. COMMENTS: This plant is similar to common chickweed but larger and more robust; the flavor is almost as good. In some regions water chickweed is much more abundant than common chickweed, and it is frequently collected by foragers who assume it is that species. AKA giant chickweed, Myosoton aquaticum. Mouse-ear chickweed & Cerastium fontanum 1 QUICK CHECK: Small chickweed with very hairy stems and broad, very hairy leaves with a bumpy surface. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a tough root, often forming mats. Stems multiple, creeping or decum- bent, to 16" (40 cm) long and 2 mm thick, hollow, often branched, red- dish or striped with reddish and green, evenly covered with long, erect, straight, moderately stiff hairs. 