BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE
turned Leaves golden paired, 0.3-0.8" (8-20 mm) long, ovate to nearly cound.
bumpy and densely nipple, sessile, the midvein strongly depressed but the
p. Flowers 8-12 covered with long, stiff hairs Mostly evergreen other Inflorescence
with many teeth at mm the across, tip where the it 5 splits petals open. almost as long as their, very tair, sebals Fruit an alongated the and
roadsides. HABITAT: Usually Repeatedly considered disturbed introduced soils of but all kinds probably in full native, to partial sur. Lawns, sidewalk cracks beaches.
hairs FOOD in USE: the leaves. The tenderest young leaves can be eaten raw or cooked. if you don't nd the dirt held ny the
COMMENTS: Extremely common, but never as tender or flavorful as common shickweed. There are numer
ous species in this genus, all safe but mediocre and barely worth eating. AKA C. vulgatum
8
Drymary Drymaria cordata 2
QUICK CHECK: Limp or trialing chickweed-like plant with pairs of nearly sessile, nearly
round leaves and bi-forking clusters of a few small, white flowers with 5 deeply cleft petals
DESCRIPTION: Annual. Stem thin, 1-2 mm, very finely hairy (most visible on the growing
tip), prostrate or lax, to 14" (36 cm) long, with a tuft of longer hair at the nodes. Leaves paired,
entire, roundish with a slightly heart-shaped base, the tips rounded or very blunt-pointed
but with a nipple or claw-like tip. Blades smooth but not glossy, hairless or with very fine,
sparse hairs. Major veins flat to slightly raised above and protruding below, emanating at or near the base and
rounding back toward the tip. Petioles shallowly channeled, 3-5% of blade length toward stem tips but much
longer near the base. Inflorescence a repeatedly bi-forking cluster, the branches getting shorter with each
fork; the flowers are crowded on thin pedicels. Flowers 4-6 mm across, with 5 triangular, pointed, cupoed or
boat-like sepals, the tip with a claw
and the margins white. Petals 5.
each split to the base (looks like
10), white, pointed. shorter than
the sepals.
CONFUSING SPECIES: Thick-
leaf drymary Drymaria pachy-
phylla (reportedly poisonous
is a relative found in Texas that
has smaller, darker, thickened
crowded, succulent leaves and
shorter stems that hug the ground.
The petals are of varying lengtns
and the longer ones exceed the
sepais.
HABITAT: Lightly disturbea areas
in partial shade. especially with
moderately moist. rich soil. Yards
parks. orchards, pastures, open
woodlots. Adventive or possibly
native
FOOD USE: Tender leaves are
eaten raw or cooked.
COMMENTS: This chickweed
relative looks the part but to
taste IS more like carpetweed or
common plantain. AKA tropical
chickweed whitesnow. there
is another kind of snow
553
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE turned Leaves golden paired, 0.3-0.8" (8-20 mm) long, ovate to nearly cound. bumpy and densely nipple, sessile, the midvein strongly depressed but the p. Flowers 8-12 covered with long, stiff hairs Mostly evergreen other Inflorescence with many teeth at mm the across, tip where the it 5 splits petals open. almost as long as their, very tair, sebals Fruit an alongated the and roadsides. HABITAT: Usually Repeatedly considered disturbed introduced soils of but all kinds probably in full native, to partial sur. Lawns, sidewalk cracks beaches. hairs FOOD in USE: the leaves. The tenderest young leaves can be eaten raw or cooked. if you don't nd the dirt held ny the COMMENTS: Extremely common, but never as tender or flavorful as common shickweed. There are numer ous species in this genus, all safe but mediocre and barely worth eating. AKA C. vulgatum 8 Drymary Drymaria cordata 2 QUICK CHECK: Limp or trialing chickweed-like plant with pairs of nearly sessile, nearly round leaves and bi-forking clusters of a few small, white flowers with 5 deeply cleft petals DESCRIPTION: Annual. Stem thin, 1-2 mm, very finely hairy (most visible on the growing tip), prostrate or lax, to 14" (36 cm) long, with a tuft of longer hair at the nodes. Leaves paired, entire, roundish with a slightly heart-shaped base, the tips rounded or very blunt-pointed but with a nipple or claw-like tip. Blades smooth but not glossy, hairless or with very fine, sparse hairs. Major veins flat to slightly raised above and protruding below, emanating at or near the base and rounding back toward the tip. Petioles shallowly channeled, 3-5% of blade length toward stem tips but much longer near the base. Inflorescence a repeatedly bi-forking cluster, the branches getting shorter with each fork; the flowers are crowded on thin pedicels. Flowers 4-6 mm across, with 5 triangular, pointed, cupoed or boat-like sepals, the tip with a claw and the margins white. Petals 5. each split to the base (looks like 10), white, pointed. shorter than the sepals. CONFUSING SPECIES: Thick- leaf drymary Drymaria pachy- phylla (reportedly poisonous is a relative found in Texas that has smaller, darker, thickened crowded, succulent leaves and shorter stems that hug the ground. The petals are of varying lengtns and the longer ones exceed the sepais. HABITAT: Lightly disturbea areas in partial shade. especially with moderately moist. rich soil. Yards parks. orchards, pastures, open woodlots. Adventive or possibly native FOOD USE: Tender leaves are eaten raw or cooked. COMMENTS: This chickweed relative looks the part but to taste IS more like carpetweed or common plantain. AKA tropical chickweed whitesnow. there is another kind of snow 553 