ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE
10 Woodland phiox
3
3
Phlox divaricata family Polemoniaceae
QUICK obvious CHECK: secondary Short plant with thin, hairy stems and paired,
ID difficulty 1, veins; flowers with a thin tube abruptly spreading entire into leaves 5 blue with pet. no
semi-woody DESCRIPTION: Perennial herb from a thin, tough rhizome. Stems have
stems horizontal portion that overwinters; the tips grow erect in an evergreen,
branched, are long-hairy, solid, rounded, to 18" (46 cm) tall and 2-3 mm thick, spring. Upright
are lanceolate, often in small clumps. Leaves paired, spreading to slightly ascending, flimsy, the nodes not
the underside entire, sessile, to 1.5" (4 cm) long, the margins hairy. The upper surface widely has spaced. Blades
below. is glossy and hairless except on the midvein, which is deeply depressed above scattered and hairs;
Each Other veins are obscure, although if you look carefully you can see the secondary veins faintly protruding
side of the blade is gently downcurved. Inflorescence (spring) a forking cluster at the apex. often raised. with
3-4 pedicels at umbel-like junctures. Flower buds long and pointed, beak-like. Sepals 5. long and pointed, nairy,
dark green-brown, in bud mostly not touching, the white of the immature corolla showing between the gaps
and making the bud striped. Corolla blue, a long, thin tube 2-3 mm wide abruptly widening at a right angle into
5 lobes (petals), these narrow at the base with broad, rounded tips, spreading 1-1.3" (25-33 mm) wide. Sexual
parts are mostly hidden in this tube. Petals form a neatly twisted cone just before opening.
HABITAT: Hardwood forests
where a little extra light hits the
forest floor, especially floodplains,
hilltops, forest edges, roadsides,
young forests, savannahs. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender new leaves
and tops can be eaten raw or
cooked in spring-general
before blooming. You can also eat
new flowers and buds on slightly
older plants. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: Easy to overlook
before bloom, woodland phlox
greens have a mild, pleasant fla-
vor. Phlox flowers are more gen-
erally known as edible, but this
species is the best I've tried. On
most summer and fall-blooming
species the greens are too tough
and bitter. AKA blue phlax.
Related edible:
11 Prairie phlox + Phlox pilosa
This is another small, spring-
blooming species with tender
greens. The stems are more
densely hairy, reddish, and
often branch. Leaves are nar-
rower and longer, almost lin-
and hairier; the midveins
ear, depressed even more deeply, and the sides The
of are the leaf scrolled downward very strongly.
flowers are purple. This plant grows in dry, open
areas. AKA downy phlox.
555
ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE 10 Woodland phiox 3 3 Phlox divaricata family Polemoniaceae QUICK obvious CHECK: secondary Short plant with thin, hairy stems and paired, ID difficulty 1, veins; flowers with a thin tube abruptly spreading entire into leaves 5 blue with pet. no semi-woody DESCRIPTION: Perennial herb from a thin, tough rhizome. Stems have stems horizontal portion that overwinters; the tips grow erect in an evergreen, branched, are long-hairy, solid, rounded, to 18" (46 cm) tall and 2-3 mm thick, spring. Upright are lanceolate, often in small clumps. Leaves paired, spreading to slightly ascending, flimsy, the nodes not the underside entire, sessile, to 1.5" (4 cm) long, the margins hairy. The upper surface widely has spaced. Blades below. is glossy and hairless except on the midvein, which is deeply depressed above scattered and hairs; Each Other veins are obscure, although if you look carefully you can see the secondary veins faintly protruding side of the blade is gently downcurved. Inflorescence (spring) a forking cluster at the apex. often raised. with 3-4 pedicels at umbel-like junctures. Flower buds long and pointed, beak-like. Sepals 5. long and pointed, nairy, dark green-brown, in bud mostly not touching, the white of the immature corolla showing between the gaps and making the bud striped. Corolla blue, a long, thin tube 2-3 mm wide abruptly widening at a right angle into 5 lobes (petals), these narrow at the base with broad, rounded tips, spreading 1-1.3" (25-33 mm) wide. Sexual parts are mostly hidden in this tube. Petals form a neatly twisted cone just before opening. HABITAT: Hardwood forests where a little extra light hits the forest floor, especially floodplains, hilltops, forest edges, roadsides, young forests, savannahs. Native. FOOD USE: Tender new leaves and tops can be eaten raw or cooked in spring-general before blooming. You can also eat new flowers and buds on slightly older plants. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: Easy to overlook before bloom, woodland phlox greens have a mild, pleasant fla- vor. Phlox flowers are more gen- erally known as edible, but this species is the best I've tried. On most summer and fall-blooming species the greens are too tough and bitter. AKA blue phlax. Related edible: 11 Prairie phlox + Phlox pilosa This is another small, spring- blooming species with tender greens. The stems are more densely hairy, reddish, and often branch. Leaves are nar- rower and longer, almost lin- and hairier; the midveins ear, depressed even more deeply, and the sides The of are the leaf scrolled downward very strongly. flowers are purple. This plant grows in dry, open areas. AKA downy phlox. 555 