BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE
Devil's claw
2
Proboscidea louisiana
family
Martyniaceae
CHECK: Low, hairv, musky plant with large leaves (looks like a zuchini plant 1.
QUICK from afar). large irregular white flowers and large, hook-shaped pods. ID difficulty
DESCRIPTION: Annual, at first erect but eventually spreading wider than tall, the sur-
faces densely covered with sticky, musky hairs giving the whole plant a rather foul odor.
Stems robust, up to 1.3" (33 mm) thick, rounded, with a few major divergent branches.
Rare in the
Leaves paired near the base, alternate near the top. Blades kidney to heart-shaped, up to 12"
eastern mapped
(30 cm) long and about as broad, heart-shaped at the base with the lobes curled upward,
range. Scattered
the tips blunt. Margins wavy but without teeth. Veins palmate, depressed above and pro-
outside mapped
truding below. Petioles very thick, rounded, hollow, unchanneled, 120-160% of blade length.
area.
Inflorescence a stout, erect raceme 10-20" (25-50 cm) long, with a dozen or more flowers
on pedicels 1-2" (2-5cm) long. Flowers hanging, tubular, about 1.9" (48 mm) long, irregular. Corolla has 5 lobes;
the upper 2 curled back, the lowest much larger and protruding, the stamens and pistils pressed against the
top of the tube. The corolla is whitish with some purple outside; the inside has purple spots and a streaked
yellow runway on the bottom. Calyx 5-lobed and irregular with the upper lobe distinctly longer, narrower, and
more erect. Behind the calyx are 2 bracts, one on each side, curled up like horns. Pods 7-9" (18-23 cm) long,
green at first, drooping, enlarged at the base with an elongated, pointed, hook-like tip. At maturity the fuzzy
outer coating splits and falls away, leaving a dry structure with a net-like surface and a fringed ridge along the
top, the hook splitting into 2. Seeds 7-9 mm long, broadly elliptic, wrinkly, dark, angled in cross section, oily.
HABITAT: Disturbed soil in full sun, especially where
sandy: pastures, barnyards, waste areas, stream-
sides, washes, ditches. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender, immature pods can be cooked
as a vegetable or made into pickles. You may want
to rub them in water to wash and remove the sticky
hairs; or parboil them, since the skins contain a bitter
element. Ripe seeds can also be eaten raw or cooked,
although I've only tried them once and don't have
much of an opinion. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: Although widespread in the Great
Plains, this plant is more common to the southwest,
where it is culturally important to many Native Amer-
icans. Devil's claw is sometimes cultivated for its
horn, unicorn plant.
fruit, which is used in making pickles. AKA ram's
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE Devil's claw 2 Proboscidea louisiana family Martyniaceae CHECK: Low, hairv, musky plant with large leaves (looks like a zuchini plant 1. QUICK from afar). large irregular white flowers and large, hook-shaped pods. ID difficulty DESCRIPTION: Annual, at first erect but eventually spreading wider than tall, the sur- faces densely covered with sticky, musky hairs giving the whole plant a rather foul odor. Stems robust, up to 1.3" (33 mm) thick, rounded, with a few major divergent branches. Rare in the Leaves paired near the base, alternate near the top. Blades kidney to heart-shaped, up to 12" eastern mapped (30 cm) long and about as broad, heart-shaped at the base with the lobes curled upward, range. Scattered the tips blunt. Margins wavy but without teeth. Veins palmate, depressed above and pro- outside mapped truding below. Petioles very thick, rounded, hollow, unchanneled, 120-160% of blade length. area. Inflorescence a stout, erect raceme 10-20" (25-50 cm) long, with a dozen or more flowers on pedicels 1-2" (2-5cm) long. Flowers hanging, tubular, about 1.9" (48 mm) long, irregular. Corolla has 5 lobes; the upper 2 curled back, the lowest much larger and protruding, the stamens and pistils pressed against the top of the tube. The corolla is whitish with some purple outside; the inside has purple spots and a streaked yellow runway on the bottom. Calyx 5-lobed and irregular with the upper lobe distinctly longer, narrower, and more erect. Behind the calyx are 2 bracts, one on each side, curled up like horns. Pods 7-9" (18-23 cm) long, green at first, drooping, enlarged at the base with an elongated, pointed, hook-like tip. At maturity the fuzzy outer coating splits and falls away, leaving a dry structure with a net-like surface and a fringed ridge along the top, the hook splitting into 2. Seeds 7-9 mm long, broadly elliptic, wrinkly, dark, angled in cross section, oily. HABITAT: Disturbed soil in full sun, especially where sandy: pastures, barnyards, waste areas, stream- sides, washes, ditches. Native. FOOD USE: Tender, immature pods can be cooked as a vegetable or made into pickles. You may want to rub them in water to wash and remove the sticky hairs; or parboil them, since the skins contain a bitter element. Ripe seeds can also be eaten raw or cooked, although I've only tried them once and don't have much of an opinion. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: Although widespread in the Great Plains, this plant is more common to the southwest, where it is culturally important to many Native Amer- icans. Devil's claw is sometimes cultivated for its horn, unicorn plant. fruit, which is used in making pickles. AKA ram's 