1cm
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE
12 Common milkweed
Asclepias
syriaca
By far the most
common spe
cies, inhabiting
fields, roadsides.
forest edges.
and almost any
other disturbed
sunny area. The
stems are erect, 3-6 (1-2 m) tall
and 8-14 mm thick. not clumped
covered with very fine, soft hair.
Shoots are thick-walled with a thin
hollow. Leaves are 4-9 (10-23 cm)
long, elliptic, thick, the tips obtusely
pointed to rounded, midvein much
lighter than the rest of the blade, the
surface faintly velvety-hairy on all
parts, especially the midvein below
Flowers are a mixture of pink. purple.
and white. Pod is teardrop-shaped.
3-6" (8-15 long, the surface COV-
ered with warts or soft spurs.
The lower pods are too old: the mid-
die and upper ones are stil' tender.
13 Showy milkweed
Asclepias speciosa
The nearly identica western counterpart to common milkweed. The stems tend to grow
more clumped and the points in the flower's crown are narrower, more elongated, and
curved at the tip
14 Green milkweed
Asclepias viridiflora
species of sandy soil in dry prairies and pine or oak barrens. Its leaves range from nar-
rowly elliptic to nearly linear linear leaves are often folded along the midvein. while broader
eaves may be very wavy. This species produces tight clusters of pale greenish flowers, the A
crowns never spreading from the central structure. Pods are long, narrow, and smooth.
milkweed Asclepias speciosa. (middle) milkweed Green hardly milkweed looks like Asciepias the same vindittora. species
557
(left)
Showy
form
of
preen
1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE 12 Common milkweed Asclepias syriaca By far the most common spe cies, inhabiting fields, roadsides. forest edges. and almost any other disturbed sunny area. The stems are erect, 3-6 (1-2 m) tall and 8-14 mm thick. not clumped covered with very fine, soft hair. Shoots are thick-walled with a thin hollow. Leaves are 4-9 (10-23 cm) long, elliptic, thick, the tips obtusely pointed to rounded, midvein much lighter than the rest of the blade, the surface faintly velvety-hairy on all parts, especially the midvein below Flowers are a mixture of pink. purple. and white. Pod is teardrop-shaped. 3-6" (8-15 long, the surface COV- ered with warts or soft spurs. The lower pods are too old: the mid- die and upper ones are stil' tender. 13 Showy milkweed Asclepias speciosa The nearly identica western counterpart to common milkweed. The stems tend to grow more clumped and the points in the flower's crown are narrower, more elongated, and curved at the tip 14 Green milkweed Asclepias viridiflora species of sandy soil in dry prairies and pine or oak barrens. Its leaves range from nar- rowly elliptic to nearly linear linear leaves are often folded along the midvein. while broader eaves may be very wavy. This species produces tight clusters of pale greenish flowers, the A crowns never spreading from the central structure. Pods are long, narrow, and smooth. milkweed Asclepias speciosa. (middle) milkweed Green hardly milkweed looks like Asciepias the same vindittora. species 557 (left) Showy form of preen 