BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE 2
2
2
2
MILKWEED (Not all species are family edible!)
Asclepiadaceae
FH-290
genus Asclepias (in part) milky sap, paired leaves on very difficulty short 3/1. petioles; umbels of
QUIC H GROUP CHECK: Unbranched tapered stems, pods with parachuted seeds. ID
flowers with a s-part Perennials, crown; mostly green erect, spreading roundish by rhizomes, to faintly exuding 4-sided, copious solid, tapered milky little, sap from 2-6' wounds (60-180 offset
DESCRIPTION: Stems clumped Leaves or alternate in loose colonies, (occasionally unbranched, whorled), entire, veins 3-9" (8-23 usually cm) 10 long. or more Midveins per side, prominent, light in color, at
broad by cm) light tall. angles color, (60-80° flat to slightly to midvein), depressed flat to above. faintly Secondary depressed cm) above, wide not from reaching upper the leaf margin. axils, with Petioles numerous 2-8%
of blade length. Inflorescence times longer than stalked the umbels flowers, 1-4" some (2.5-10 flowers drooping are folded in the back edible along species the pedicel, listed below hiding
Flowers 6-15 reflexed. Pointed forward is a crown composed Fruit
pedicels several mm wide, with a unique form: 5 elliptic, cupped petals of 5 "hoods," each covering
the calyx lobes, in which toward are the also center, where the sex organs are hidden in a complex release structure. extremely flattened a greer
pod, a "horn" held curved erect. narrowed to a pointed or acuminate tip, opening on one side to
winged seeds attached to a silky parachute.
PLANTS: Various milkweed shoots are often confused with those of common dogbane, which bit
CONFUSING extremely bitter. This confusion accounts for the widespread belief that milkweed shoots are very
ter. are (If you encounter bitter milkweed, do not eat it.) The stems of dogbane shoots are smooth, hairless, and
covered with a faint bloom, while those of all the milkweeds listed here lack bloom and are minutely fuzzy
Dogbane leaves (in the shoot stage) get progressively smaller toward the top, while those of milkweed shoots
get larger. Dogbane stems and young leaves are typically more reddish. Mature plants are easy to tell apart.
(See dogbanes, .675)
FOOD USE: All parts of milkweed should be boiled before consumption, although the multiple changes of
boiling water urged by many authors are generally unnecessary. Young shoots (spring), tender leafy tops
(early summer), flower buds (early to mid summer), and immature pods (mid to late summer) can all be used
in soups or casseroles, or served alone as a vegetable. The young pods may be eaten whole, but with larger
(but still immature) pods I like to remove the silk and use that by itself; it is mild and sweet and adds a melted
cheese-like texture to casseroles.
WARNINGS: Some milkweeds are toxic. All species contain
bitter cardiac glycosides, and in some species these are suf-
ficiently concentrated to render the plants unsafe. | have listed
5 edible species below, but do not assume that unlisted species
are similarly safe. Milkweeds should always be eaten well-
builed and in moderation. Gastric upset has been reported
by some, even with the traditionally eaten species. The raw
sap contains compounds that soften protein structures and
these can make your fingertips sore from handling them-so it
makes sense that they could irritate your intestines. Consume
cautiously at first.
COMMENTS: Despite the above warnings, this is one of the
best-known, most popular, and best-documented wild
the etables, providing several good products through veg-
Americans. growing season It is a traditional food for much of
like fiber Milkweeds also provide a highly insulative many Native
in the bark from the seed floss, and all the species have bast down-
about that can be used to make cordage. You've fibers
The milkweeds being important for monarch all heard
aring monarchs for bar need more foragers planting, butterflies
shoots kyard milkweed patches. Regular preserving, and
by extending improves the these milkweed olonies for monarch picking of
the summer All the availability listed species of meristematic are native. growth later habitat into
sse
Diemon wilk need shoot at a good stage to eat
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE 2 2 2 2 MILKWEED (Not all species are family edible!) Asclepiadaceae FH-290 genus Asclepias (in part) milky sap, paired leaves on very difficulty short 3/1. petioles; umbels of QUIC H GROUP CHECK: Unbranched tapered stems, pods with parachuted seeds. ID flowers with a s-part Perennials, crown; mostly green erect, spreading roundish by rhizomes, to faintly exuding 4-sided, copious solid, tapered milky little, sap from 2-6' wounds (60-180 offset DESCRIPTION: Stems clumped Leaves or alternate in loose colonies, (occasionally unbranched, whorled), entire, veins 3-9" (8-23 usually cm) 10 long. or more Midveins per side, prominent, light in color, at broad by cm) light tall. angles color, (60-80° flat to slightly to midvein), depressed flat to above. faintly Secondary depressed cm) above, wide not from reaching upper the leaf margin. axils, with Petioles numerous 2-8% of blade length. Inflorescence times longer than stalked the umbels flowers, 1-4" some (2.5-10 flowers drooping are folded in the back edible along species the pedicel, listed below hiding Flowers 6-15 reflexed. Pointed forward is a crown composed Fruit pedicels several mm wide, with a unique form: 5 elliptic, cupped petals of 5 "hoods," each covering the calyx lobes, in which toward are the also center, where the sex organs are hidden in a complex release structure. extremely flattened a greer pod, a "horn" held curved erect. narrowed to a pointed or acuminate tip, opening on one side to winged seeds attached to a silky parachute. PLANTS: Various milkweed shoots are often confused with those of common dogbane, which bit CONFUSING extremely bitter. This confusion accounts for the widespread belief that milkweed shoots are very ter. are (If you encounter bitter milkweed, do not eat it.) The stems of dogbane shoots are smooth, hairless, and covered with a faint bloom, while those of all the milkweeds listed here lack bloom and are minutely fuzzy Dogbane leaves (in the shoot stage) get progressively smaller toward the top, while those of milkweed shoots get larger. Dogbane stems and young leaves are typically more reddish. Mature plants are easy to tell apart. (See dogbanes, .675) FOOD USE: All parts of milkweed should be boiled before consumption, although the multiple changes of boiling water urged by many authors are generally unnecessary. Young shoots (spring), tender leafy tops (early summer), flower buds (early to mid summer), and immature pods (mid to late summer) can all be used in soups or casseroles, or served alone as a vegetable. The young pods may be eaten whole, but with larger (but still immature) pods I like to remove the silk and use that by itself; it is mild and sweet and adds a melted cheese-like texture to casseroles. WARNINGS: Some milkweeds are toxic. All species contain bitter cardiac glycosides, and in some species these are suf- ficiently concentrated to render the plants unsafe. | have listed 5 edible species below, but do not assume that unlisted species are similarly safe. Milkweeds should always be eaten well- builed and in moderation. Gastric upset has been reported by some, even with the traditionally eaten species. The raw sap contains compounds that soften protein structures and these can make your fingertips sore from handling them-so it makes sense that they could irritate your intestines. Consume cautiously at first. COMMENTS: Despite the above warnings, this is one of the best-known, most popular, and best-documented wild the etables, providing several good products through veg- Americans. growing season It is a traditional food for much of like fiber Milkweeds also provide a highly insulative many Native in the bark from the seed floss, and all the species have bast down- about that can be used to make cordage. You've fibers The milkweeds being important for monarch all heard aring monarchs for bar need more foragers planting, butterflies shoots kyard milkweed patches. Regular preserving, and by extending improves the these milkweed olonies for monarch picking of the summer All the availability listed species of meristematic are native. growth later habitat into sse Diemon wilk need shoot at a good stage to eat 