BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE
Sand southern Great Plains, and is especially (50-80 abundant cm) in long the Sandhills growing 3-5"
milkweed Asclepias arenaria
region Grows in small of in sandy Nebraska lumps soil densely by on maturity This the soft-hairy, species these has stems and unbranched the often flowers lean stems are or fall bumpy. creamy. 20-32" over. The Pods leaves are stout are wavy, and short,
(8 shaped 12 cm) much long like those of common milkweed but not
6
Poke milkweed
Asclepias exaltata
A tail species with loose flower clusters. Its leaves are narrower, thinner, and more pointed
than those of most other species, and are sometimes borne in whorls of 3 or 4. The pods
are much narrower. The stems of robust plants are clumped from a large root mass (like
its namesake, poke, which its leaves also resemble). Poke milkweed is native to dry forests
and savannahs, particularly oak and hickory. The flowers often exude a thick, sugary nectar
which was reportedly collected by some Native Americans as a sweetener. Note: Poke
milkweed is not the same as pokeweed!
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES PAIRED, ENTIRE Sand southern Great Plains, and is especially (50-80 abundant cm) in long the Sandhills growing 3-5" milkweed Asclepias arenaria region Grows in small of in sandy Nebraska lumps soil densely by on maturity This the soft-hairy, species these has stems and unbranched the often flowers lean stems are or fall bumpy. creamy. 20-32" over. The Pods leaves are stout are wavy, and short, (8 shaped 12 cm) much long like those of common milkweed but not 6 Poke milkweed Asclepias exaltata A tail species with loose flower clusters. Its leaves are narrower, thinner, and more pointed than those of most other species, and are sometimes borne in whorls of 3 or 4. The pods are much narrower. The stems of robust plants are clumped from a large root mass (like its namesake, poke, which its leaves also resemble). Poke milkweed is native to dry forests and savannahs, particularly oak and hickory. The flowers often exude a thick, sugary nectar which was reportedly collected by some Native Americans as a sweetener. Note: Poke milkweed is not the same as pokeweed! 