LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES
BASAL PAIRED AND TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND
Clearweed Pilea pumila Urticaceae (Nettle family)
2
2
QUICK CHECK: Erect herb with a thick, succulent, translucent, hairless stem and paired
leaves; flowers tiny, clustered, not showy. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Annual, highly variable in size. Stem 3-28" (8-70 cm) tall at maturity and
1-18 mm thick, hairless, succulent, solid, translucent, usually unbranched, proportionately
very thick, cross section with 2 opposing flat to slightly concave sides alternating with 2 convex
sides. Leaves paired, 0.6-5" (15-130 mm) long, broadly ovate, round to obtuse at the base.
The tip is like an elongated, narrow, blunt lobe. Blade thin, smooth except for scattered long,
erect hairs-on the upper surface these arise from a raised bump. Major veins 3 major ones from the base, very
deeply depressed above and protruding below, the outer 2 arching back toward the tip forming a "leaf within
a leaf." Smaller lateral veins are numerous, at broad angles, depressed but not as deeply. Margin has large,
long blunt teeth with nipple tips. Stipules absent. Petioles 60-110% of blade length, narrow, grooved, hairless.
Inflorescence short, densely packed, branching, axillary and terminal clusters, the branches spreading (not
drooping or ascending). Flowers tiny and inconspicuous, producing small, dark, ovate seeds.
HABITAT: Rich, moist soil subject to minor surface disturbance, in moderate to heavy shade. Native.
FOOD USE: The young greens can be gathered in spring or early summer and eaten raw or cooked, but are
better cooked. They are
reminiscent of their rela-
tives, the nettles, although
not as good. The better part
of clearweed is the succu-
lent stem. Because these
are held stiff by turgor
pressure rather than cel-
lulose and lignin fibers, they
remain tender throughout
the growing season. They
make a delightfully crisp
and juicy addition to saiads,
or a raw snack. Conserva-
tion 2.
COMMENTS: Clearweed
plants are highly variable
in size; the smaller ones are
hardly worth the time, but
large ones may have quite
substantial stems, Not a
well-known edible, but once
you try it, you'll always keep
your eye out for it,
RELATED EDIBLE: Lesser
clearweed Pilea fontana is
very similar but tends to
be smaller and have less
clear stems and less deeply
depressed veins. It grows
swamps. around mossy springs and
560
LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES BASAL PAIRED AND TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND Clearweed Pilea pumila Urticaceae (Nettle family) 2 2 QUICK CHECK: Erect herb with a thick, succulent, translucent, hairless stem and paired leaves; flowers tiny, clustered, not showy. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Annual, highly variable in size. Stem 3-28" (8-70 cm) tall at maturity and 1-18 mm thick, hairless, succulent, solid, translucent, usually unbranched, proportionately very thick, cross section with 2 opposing flat to slightly concave sides alternating with 2 convex sides. Leaves paired, 0.6-5" (15-130 mm) long, broadly ovate, round to obtuse at the base. The tip is like an elongated, narrow, blunt lobe. Blade thin, smooth except for scattered long, erect hairs-on the upper surface these arise from a raised bump. Major veins 3 major ones from the base, very deeply depressed above and protruding below, the outer 2 arching back toward the tip forming a "leaf within a leaf." Smaller lateral veins are numerous, at broad angles, depressed but not as deeply. Margin has large, long blunt teeth with nipple tips. Stipules absent. Petioles 60-110% of blade length, narrow, grooved, hairless. Inflorescence short, densely packed, branching, axillary and terminal clusters, the branches spreading (not drooping or ascending). Flowers tiny and inconspicuous, producing small, dark, ovate seeds. HABITAT: Rich, moist soil subject to minor surface disturbance, in moderate to heavy shade. Native. FOOD USE: The young greens can be gathered in spring or early summer and eaten raw or cooked, but are better cooked. They are reminiscent of their rela- tives, the nettles, although not as good. The better part of clearweed is the succu- lent stem. Because these are held stiff by turgor pressure rather than cel- lulose and lignin fibers, they remain tender throughout the growing season. They make a delightfully crisp and juicy addition to saiads, or a raw snack. Conserva- tion 2. COMMENTS: Clearweed plants are highly variable in size; the smaller ones are hardly worth the time, but large ones may have quite substantial stems, Not a well-known edible, but once you try it, you'll always keep your eye out for it, RELATED EDIBLE: Lesser clearweed Pilea fontana is very similar but tends to be smaller and have less clear stems and less deeply depressed veins. It grows swamps. around mossy springs and 560 