inticaced (Nettle family
1cm
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE,
PAIRED AND TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND LEAVES
2 False nettle
2
2
Boehmeria cylindrica
Urticaceae (Nettle family)
QUICK CHECK: Erect, unbranched herb with a 4-grooved stem. lacking stingers;
with 3 main veins from the base; ascending axillary spikes of tiny greenish Blowers leaves
ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial herb from thin rhizomes, forming colonies. Stems often clumped,
erect, unbranched, 24-52" (60-132 cm) tall and 4-6 mm thick, tapering below ground,
hairless or faintly pubescent (especially when young), with 4 low ridges and 4 shallow
grooves between them. Two of the ridges are narrower, running down from the petiole
bases. Young stems are dark green to purple-brown and rough toward the base, solid. Leaves paired. 2-5"
(5-13 cm) long, sometimes not perfectly opposing, oval or broadly ovate, rounded at the base and tapered to
an acuminate tip. Blades have minute, stiff, leaning hair above, and longer hair on the protruding main veins
below. Prominent veins 3 from the base, the outer 2 not strongly arching; all veins and veinlets are deeply
depressed above. Margins serrated with large, sharp teeth. Petioles 20-60% of blade length. light in color
(almost translucent), grooved on top but otherwise thick and nearly round; fine-hairy, especially on top and
when young. Stipules elongated, small, leaning toward and often touching those of the opposing leaf. Inflo-
rescence ascending unbranched spikes 0.4-4" (1-10 cm) long, paired from upper leaf axils; they have a tiny leaf
or leaves at or near the tip. Female spikes are continuous; male spikes are interrupted. Flowers tiny, greenish.
unshowy, and inconspicuous. Fruits flattened and disc-like with a bulge around the seed.
HABITAT: Moist semi-open soil; river floodplains, rich meadows, marsh and lake borders. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather tender tops and shoots in spring and use as a potherb. These can also be boiled for ten
or broth throughout the growing season. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This usually overlooked species looks and tastes similar to stinging and wood nettles out
quite as good. False nettle has very strong bast fibers. A close relative, ramie (Boehmeria nivea) IS rivated
as a fiber crop in Asia (and also has edible greens). AKA bog hemp.
inticaced (Nettle family 1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, PAIRED AND TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND LEAVES 2 False nettle 2 2 Boehmeria cylindrica Urticaceae (Nettle family) QUICK CHECK: Erect, unbranched herb with a 4-grooved stem. lacking stingers; with 3 main veins from the base; ascending axillary spikes of tiny greenish Blowers leaves ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial herb from thin rhizomes, forming colonies. Stems often clumped, erect, unbranched, 24-52" (60-132 cm) tall and 4-6 mm thick, tapering below ground, hairless or faintly pubescent (especially when young), with 4 low ridges and 4 shallow grooves between them. Two of the ridges are narrower, running down from the petiole bases. Young stems are dark green to purple-brown and rough toward the base, solid. Leaves paired. 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, sometimes not perfectly opposing, oval or broadly ovate, rounded at the base and tapered to an acuminate tip. Blades have minute, stiff, leaning hair above, and longer hair on the protruding main veins below. Prominent veins 3 from the base, the outer 2 not strongly arching; all veins and veinlets are deeply depressed above. Margins serrated with large, sharp teeth. Petioles 20-60% of blade length. light in color (almost translucent), grooved on top but otherwise thick and nearly round; fine-hairy, especially on top and when young. Stipules elongated, small, leaning toward and often touching those of the opposing leaf. Inflo- rescence ascending unbranched spikes 0.4-4" (1-10 cm) long, paired from upper leaf axils; they have a tiny leaf or leaves at or near the tip. Female spikes are continuous; male spikes are interrupted. Flowers tiny, greenish. unshowy, and inconspicuous. Fruits flattened and disc-like with a bulge around the seed. HABITAT: Moist semi-open soil; river floodplains, rich meadows, marsh and lake borders. Native. FOOD USE: Gather tender tops and shoots in spring and use as a potherb. These can also be boiled for ten or broth throughout the growing season. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This usually overlooked species looks and tastes similar to stinging and wood nettles out quite as good. False nettle has very strong bast fibers. A close relative, ramie (Boehmeria nivea) IS rivated as a fiber crop in Asia (and also has edible greens). AKA bog hemp. 