mm
0
1
BASAL PAIRED LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE,
AND TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND LEAVES
4
Jerusalem-artichoke
2
NG-413
Helianthus
tuberosus
Asteraceae
(Composite
family)
QUICK CHECK: Tall, unbranched sunflower, rough all over from
toothed; disk and rays yellow. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial sunflower 5-9' (1.5-2.7 m) tall and up to 08 (2
forming colonies by rhizome. Tubers elongated and gradually thickening. 2-6" (5-15 cm,
long and 0.4-1.2" (1-3 cm) thick, light brown, tan, or reddish, with bulged bads and often
an upturned tip. Occasionally they are knobby and clustered. Stem erect. green. round
ish, pithy-solid, with stiff, erect hairs growing from pedestals, giving it a sandpapery feel,
unbranched except near the top, the form always much taller than wide. Leaves paired. but often alternate
in the top quarter, especially on robust specimens; rarely whorled Blades ovate. 3-1" (8-18 cm) long, with a
long, sharp tip, the base obtusely rounded but then decurrent along the petiole The surface is roughened above
with sand-like bumps. Midvein flat to slightly depressed above in a broad valley. Secondary veins are lightly
depressed above and protruding below. There are 2 major secondary veins near (but not at) the base at 25-35
fading before the midpoint of the blade; other secondary veins are much smaller and at broader angles
Margins have broad, shallow, forward-pointing, nipple-tipped teeth. Petioles less than 20% of blade length
flat to slightly channeled on top, the non-winged portion very short. Inflorescence (late summer through fail,
loose, spreading clusters of 3-25, the heads 2.5-3.5" (6-9 cm) wide, with disk and ray florets both yellow the
rays long-elliptic, overlapping at the base, and spreading (not drooping). The disk is a semicircular mound
Seeds like sunflower seeds in miniature. Domesticated varieties, which often escape, are more robust. N to
larger, stouter, more numerous tubers clustered close to the base.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Wild sunflower (p. 603) is not colonial:
has more wide-spreading branches, broader leaves, and flowerheads
that are dark in the center. It lacks tubers.
HABITAT: Naturally found in river floodplains in fuil to partial sun-
light. It has spread to meadows, fencerows, and roadsides. especially
in areas with rich, sandy soils. Native.
FOOD USE: Tubers of genetically wild plants are usually 4-24'
(10-60 cm) from the parent plant on thin rhizomes. and 1-3" (2.5-8 cm)
below the soil surface; you must dig a large area to get them. The
tubers are best collected as late as possible-through the winter if
the ground is not frozen, or early the following spring They should De
well-cooked before eating to avoid excessive flatulence. The tubers
are good mashed like potatoes (although dissimilar in texture) or
in soups and stews. Some cultivars are sweet enough to eat raw.
Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: The tubers of this well-known wild edible are hignly The
variable. Don't expect wild ones to look like the domestic cultivars.
tubers taste good but can cause serious and often uncomtor table late sas
individuals. This can be mitigated by a combination of very ticnoke
harvest in many and prolonged cooking. AKA sunroot sunchoke, far
503
mm 0 1 BASAL PAIRED LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, AND TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND LEAVES 4 Jerusalem-artichoke 2 NG-413 Helianthus tuberosus Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK CHECK: Tall, unbranched sunflower, rough all over from toothed; disk and rays yellow. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial sunflower 5-9' (1.5-2.7 m) tall and up to 08 (2 forming colonies by rhizome. Tubers elongated and gradually thickening. 2-6" (5-15 cm, long and 0.4-1.2" (1-3 cm) thick, light brown, tan, or reddish, with bulged bads and often an upturned tip. Occasionally they are knobby and clustered. Stem erect. green. round ish, pithy-solid, with stiff, erect hairs growing from pedestals, giving it a sandpapery feel, unbranched except near the top, the form always much taller than wide. Leaves paired. but often alternate in the top quarter, especially on robust specimens; rarely whorled Blades ovate. 3-1" (8-18 cm) long, with a long, sharp tip, the base obtusely rounded but then decurrent along the petiole The surface is roughened above with sand-like bumps. Midvein flat to slightly depressed above in a broad valley. Secondary veins are lightly depressed above and protruding below. There are 2 major secondary veins near (but not at) the base at 25-35 fading before the midpoint of the blade; other secondary veins are much smaller and at broader angles Margins have broad, shallow, forward-pointing, nipple-tipped teeth. Petioles less than 20% of blade length flat to slightly channeled on top, the non-winged portion very short. Inflorescence (late summer through fail, loose, spreading clusters of 3-25, the heads 2.5-3.5" (6-9 cm) wide, with disk and ray florets both yellow the rays long-elliptic, overlapping at the base, and spreading (not drooping). The disk is a semicircular mound Seeds like sunflower seeds in miniature. Domesticated varieties, which often escape, are more robust. N to larger, stouter, more numerous tubers clustered close to the base. CONFUSING PLANTS: Wild sunflower (p. 603) is not colonial: has more wide-spreading branches, broader leaves, and flowerheads that are dark in the center. It lacks tubers. HABITAT: Naturally found in river floodplains in fuil to partial sun- light. It has spread to meadows, fencerows, and roadsides. especially in areas with rich, sandy soils. Native. FOOD USE: Tubers of genetically wild plants are usually 4-24' (10-60 cm) from the parent plant on thin rhizomes. and 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) below the soil surface; you must dig a large area to get them. The tubers are best collected as late as possible-through the winter if the ground is not frozen, or early the following spring They should De well-cooked before eating to avoid excessive flatulence. The tubers are good mashed like potatoes (although dissimilar in texture) or in soups and stews. Some cultivars are sweet enough to eat raw. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: The tubers of this well-known wild edible are hignly The variable. Don't expect wild ones to look like the domestic cultivars. tubers taste good but can cause serious and often uncomtor table late sas individuals. This can be mitigated by a combination of very ticnoke harvest in many and prolonged cooking. AKA sunroot sunchoke, far 503 