ABSENT, STEMS
BASAL PAIRED LEAVES AND TOOTHED, LOBED,
genus Quickweed Galinsoga 3 Asteraceae IWE-315 (Composite family)
Short, hairy, branched herb with ovate, difficulty toothed 1. leaves and tiny flow-
QUICK CHECK with 5 well-spaced, 3-lobed white rays. ID
erheads 8-26" (20-66 cm) tall. Stems thin, roundish where but crowded, finely
DESCRIPTION: Annual lined, herbs zigzag, branching at broad angles except narrowly
lanceolate, 2-4" (5-10 Veins deeply depressed above. Two major veins dull, well-spaced, each nipple-tipped side of the midvein, teeth
the surface long, cm) long. Surface not glossy, long-hairy, especially arise at the base on
grooved and with sometimes erect hairs. Leaves paired, the lower ones ovate, the on upper the margin and
these arching and the nearly tip; often these are little more than bumps on upper leaves. Inflorescence Petiole a branching cluster
main veins below. re-converging at the leaf tip. Margins have coarse, broadly channeled,
curling toward of blade length on lower leaves; the upper leaves are nearly sessile. with and disk florets. The
25-40% heads at the branch tips, the peduncles long. Heads 5-7 mm wide, ray wide long, usually
disk of a few is greenish small yellow, the florets 5-lobed and tiny. Rays white (rarely pink), almost as as
5. spaced so as not to touch each other, 2- or 3-lobed.
SPECIES: G. quadriradiata is the more common of the two very similar species. G. parviflora is smaller and
less hairy, with narrower leaves that are scarcely toothed, and smaller rays.
HABITAT: Disturbed ground with moist soil, partial sun preferred. Gardens, lawn edges, lakeshores, barn-
yards, construction sites. Usually said to be non-native, but this is likely a native species that has increased
its abundance and distribution due to human disturbance.
FOOD USE: Gather tender leafy tops before or at the beginning of flowering, most often from late spring
through early summer. Look for clean plants, as the hairy surface readily holds dirt. They are edible raw and
excellent in smoothies, but more commonly used as a potherb.
COMMENTS: The flavor is mild and young growth is tender, but some object to the hairiness. It is often said
that this weed has invaded North America from Central and South America over the last few hundred years,
but it may have been here all along. Quickweed is a key ingredient in the traditional Columbian soup ajiaco,
along with corn, potatoes, and chicken. AKA guascas.
562
Galinsoga quadriradiata flowers
ABSENT, STEMS BASAL PAIRED LEAVES AND TOOTHED, LOBED, genus Quickweed Galinsoga 3 Asteraceae IWE-315 (Composite family) Short, hairy, branched herb with ovate, difficulty toothed 1. leaves and tiny flow- QUICK CHECK with 5 well-spaced, 3-lobed white rays. ID erheads 8-26" (20-66 cm) tall. Stems thin, roundish where but crowded, finely DESCRIPTION: Annual lined, herbs zigzag, branching at broad angles except narrowly lanceolate, 2-4" (5-10 Veins deeply depressed above. Two major veins dull, well-spaced, each nipple-tipped side of the midvein, teeth the surface long, cm) long. Surface not glossy, long-hairy, especially arise at the base on grooved and with sometimes erect hairs. Leaves paired, the lower ones ovate, the on upper the margin and these arching and the nearly tip; often these are little more than bumps on upper leaves. Inflorescence Petiole a branching cluster main veins below. re-converging at the leaf tip. Margins have coarse, broadly channeled, curling toward of blade length on lower leaves; the upper leaves are nearly sessile. with and disk florets. The 25-40% heads at the branch tips, the peduncles long. Heads 5-7 mm wide, ray wide long, usually disk of a few is greenish small yellow, the florets 5-lobed and tiny. Rays white (rarely pink), almost as as 5. spaced so as not to touch each other, 2- or 3-lobed. SPECIES: G. quadriradiata is the more common of the two very similar species. G. parviflora is smaller and less hairy, with narrower leaves that are scarcely toothed, and smaller rays. HABITAT: Disturbed ground with moist soil, partial sun preferred. Gardens, lawn edges, lakeshores, barn- yards, construction sites. Usually said to be non-native, but this is likely a native species that has increased its abundance and distribution due to human disturbance. FOOD USE: Gather tender leafy tops before or at the beginning of flowering, most often from late spring through early summer. Look for clean plants, as the hairy surface readily holds dirt. They are edible raw and excellent in smoothies, but more commonly used as a potherb. COMMENTS: The flavor is mild and young growth is tender, but some object to the hairiness. It is often said that this weed has invaded North America from Central and South America over the last few hundred years, but it may have been here all along. Quickweed is a key ingredient in the traditional Columbian soup ajiaco, along with corn, potatoes, and chicken. AKA guascas. 562 Galinsoga quadriradiata flowers 