BASAL PAIRED AND TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND
LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES
5 Sumpweed
2
Iva annua Asteraceae (Composite family)
CHECK: Tall, hairy herb with pointed leaves in pairs; crowded terminal spike of
tiny, QUICK round flower fruit clusters, each with an ascending bract curled over it. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Annual, 3-6' (1-2 tall, somewhat aromatic, the form much taller than
wide. Stems single, erect, straight, to 0.6" (15 mm) thick, rounded, green or reddish (mostly
in sun), solid near the base but hollow above, the surface roughened by bumps bearing
stiff, curved hairs (but typically hairless near the base), unbranched where crowded but
often branchy in the open. Branches thin, straight, simple, and strongly ascending. Leaves paired (
leaves near the inflorescence may be alternate), the blades 2-6" (5-15 cm) long, ovate to lanceo
bases acute or obtuse, the tips acuminate. There are scattered short hairs below and minute hair
with longer hairs on the margins and main veins. Major veins 3 from the base, slightly depressed at
protruding below. Margins have widely yet variably spaced teeth of variable size. Petioles 20-30%
length, narrowly channeled, the margins hairy. Inflorescence several crowded terminal and axillar
2-9" (5-23 cm) long, uniform in thickness, held vertically or nearly so on long peduncles in the top
the plant. Heads (late summer) evenly-spaced, bell-like, drooping, about 6 mm across, not showy, ea
with 12-20 florets. There is a curved, strongly ascending bract to the left of each head, much longer than t
broad-based with a long acuminate tip, a prominent midvein ridge, and a hairy margin. Seed (achene
flattened, triangle to teardrop-shaped, 2-4 mm long, borne singly or in small
groups, enclosed by 3-5 chaffy bracts, ripening to dark brown.
HABITAT: Partial shade to full sun in moist, disturbed soil. Crop fields, banks,
ditches, river floodplains, construction sites, waste ground. Native.
FOOD USE: When mature in autumn the seeds can be stripped off by hand
or beaten into a container. After drying, rub and winnow to remove the chaff.
The seeds are very oily and can be used like sunflower seeds. There is a bitter
substance on the exterior that is removed with the chaff-the kernels have a
pleasant flavor. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Though little known and almost never collected today, this
was once a staple food in the central US, extensively cultivated in
efficient Domesticated forms with large seeds were developed but are now extinct, prehistory.
food use processing techniques have been lost. What we know of this plant's and
comes primarily from archaeology. AKA marsh-elder.
BASAL PAIRED AND TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES 5 Sumpweed 2 Iva annua Asteraceae (Composite family) CHECK: Tall, hairy herb with pointed leaves in pairs; crowded terminal spike of tiny, QUICK round flower fruit clusters, each with an ascending bract curled over it. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Annual, 3-6' (1-2 tall, somewhat aromatic, the form much taller than wide. Stems single, erect, straight, to 0.6" (15 mm) thick, rounded, green or reddish (mostly in sun), solid near the base but hollow above, the surface roughened by bumps bearing stiff, curved hairs (but typically hairless near the base), unbranched where crowded but often branchy in the open. Branches thin, straight, simple, and strongly ascending. Leaves paired ( leaves near the inflorescence may be alternate), the blades 2-6" (5-15 cm) long, ovate to lanceo bases acute or obtuse, the tips acuminate. There are scattered short hairs below and minute hair with longer hairs on the margins and main veins. Major veins 3 from the base, slightly depressed at protruding below. Margins have widely yet variably spaced teeth of variable size. Petioles 20-30% length, narrowly channeled, the margins hairy. Inflorescence several crowded terminal and axillar 2-9" (5-23 cm) long, uniform in thickness, held vertically or nearly so on long peduncles in the top the plant. Heads (late summer) evenly-spaced, bell-like, drooping, about 6 mm across, not showy, ea with 12-20 florets. There is a curved, strongly ascending bract to the left of each head, much longer than t broad-based with a long acuminate tip, a prominent midvein ridge, and a hairy margin. Seed (achene flattened, triangle to teardrop-shaped, 2-4 mm long, borne singly or in small groups, enclosed by 3-5 chaffy bracts, ripening to dark brown. HABITAT: Partial shade to full sun in moist, disturbed soil. Crop fields, banks, ditches, river floodplains, construction sites, waste ground. Native. FOOD USE: When mature in autumn the seeds can be stripped off by hand or beaten into a container. After drying, rub and winnow to remove the chaff. The seeds are very oily and can be used like sunflower seeds. There is a bitter substance on the exterior that is removed with the chaff-the kernels have a pleasant flavor. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Though little known and almost never collected today, this was once a staple food in the central US, extensively cultivated in efficient Domesticated forms with large seeds were developed but are now extinct, prehistory. food use processing techniques have been lost. What we know of this plant's and comes primarily from archaeology. AKA marsh-elder. 