AND ASSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE,
TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND LEAVES
6 Giant ragweed
3
pith 2
Ambrosia trifida Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK ID difficulty CHECK: 1. Towering, rough, straight-stemmed herb with deeply 3 lohed leaves
DESCRIPTION: often with Very large annual, much taller than wide, occasionally
(1.5-4 m) tall only a few ascending, paired branches near the top. Stem straight, branchy but most
stiff and 0.4-0.9" (10-23 mm) thick, roundish but somewhat ridged, erect, 5-13
hairs, pithy in the center, with a bulged collar around the stem at each node. covered Leaves with
unlobed), (8-25 cm) the long, normally deeply 3-lobed but occasionally 5 or 7-lobed or unlobed (the 3-10" uppermost
There tip acuminate, the base broad but then decurrent, The surface is rough above from commonly stiff
are 2 major secondary veins arising near (but not at) the base; veins and veinlets are depressed above. hairs.
Margins serrated. Petioles 25-45% of blade length, often with winged margins. Inflorescence male and female
separate on the same plants. The male heads are numerous, in crowded terminal racemes 4-14" (10-36 cm)
long, hanging bell-like at the end of short 90° pedicels, the bracts with a few black stripes, the florets yellow-
ish to creamy. Female heads are fewer, in clusters in the axils of small upper leaves below the male flowers. not
showy. Fruits spongy-woody, 9-11 mm long, with a narrow, blunt base and six prongs at the end-5 of the prongs
on the outside and shorter, the middle prong much longer. Inside is the single, soft, edible kernel.
HABITAT: Rich disturbed soil in full sun. A common and often troublesome weed of high-quality farmland.
roadsides, ditches, and barnyards. Native; originally found in floodplains.
FOOD USE: In early fall, strip the ripe fruits off by hand, or lean the plants and beat with a stick into a clean
sled, then dry them. The seeds ripen while the plants are still green. They are soft, oily, and delicious--similar
to sunflower seeds, but I have not found a labor-efficient way to remove the corky husks. The pith can be eaten
out of the center of half-grown stalks. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is one of our largest and most distinctive herbs. Its
pollen is a frequent cause of hay fever. Giant ragweed seeds were eaten
by prehistoric people in the Midwest and upper South, where it was com-
monly cultivated. Domestic strains with larger seeds and thinner husks were
developed, but these seem to have gone extinct before Europeans arrived in
North America. The techniques and technology used in processing ragweed
seeds have been lost.
565
AND ASSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND LEAVES 6 Giant ragweed 3 pith 2 Ambrosia trifida Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK ID difficulty CHECK: 1. Towering, rough, straight-stemmed herb with deeply 3 lohed leaves DESCRIPTION: often with Very large annual, much taller than wide, occasionally (1.5-4 m) tall only a few ascending, paired branches near the top. Stem straight, branchy but most stiff and 0.4-0.9" (10-23 mm) thick, roundish but somewhat ridged, erect, 5-13 hairs, pithy in the center, with a bulged collar around the stem at each node. covered Leaves with unlobed), (8-25 cm) the long, normally deeply 3-lobed but occasionally 5 or 7-lobed or unlobed (the 3-10" uppermost There tip acuminate, the base broad but then decurrent, The surface is rough above from commonly stiff are 2 major secondary veins arising near (but not at) the base; veins and veinlets are depressed above. hairs. Margins serrated. Petioles 25-45% of blade length, often with winged margins. Inflorescence male and female separate on the same plants. The male heads are numerous, in crowded terminal racemes 4-14" (10-36 cm) long, hanging bell-like at the end of short 90° pedicels, the bracts with a few black stripes, the florets yellow- ish to creamy. Female heads are fewer, in clusters in the axils of small upper leaves below the male flowers. not showy. Fruits spongy-woody, 9-11 mm long, with a narrow, blunt base and six prongs at the end-5 of the prongs on the outside and shorter, the middle prong much longer. Inside is the single, soft, edible kernel. HABITAT: Rich disturbed soil in full sun. A common and often troublesome weed of high-quality farmland. roadsides, ditches, and barnyards. Native; originally found in floodplains. FOOD USE: In early fall, strip the ripe fruits off by hand, or lean the plants and beat with a stick into a clean sled, then dry them. The seeds ripen while the plants are still green. They are soft, oily, and delicious--similar to sunflower seeds, but I have not found a labor-efficient way to remove the corky husks. The pith can be eaten out of the center of half-grown stalks. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is one of our largest and most distinctive herbs. Its pollen is a frequent cause of hay fever. Giant ragweed seeds were eaten by prehistoric people in the Midwest and upper South, where it was com- monly cultivated. Domestic strains with larger seeds and thinner husks were developed, but these seem to have gone extinct before Europeans arrived in North America. The techniques and technology used in processing ragweed seeds have been lost. 565 