1cm
BASAL PAIRED LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE,
AND TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND LEAVES
8 Swamp lousewort
Pedicularis lanceolata family Orobanchaceae
QUICK nately lobed CHECK: Hairy, erect plant of wetland margins with leaves that are 1000
and ruffled by extremely depressed veins. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: solid with Perennial. Stems clumped, 20-40) (50-100 cm) tall
sides (two long, soft hairs curving toward the base, with four grooves and 5-8
Leaves of them more prominent). There are ascending branches in running the down the
to both paired, 2-2.5" (5-6.5 cm) long, oblanceolate to lanceolate or long-elliptic, upper third
ends, sessile or nearly so. Lower leaves are blunt-tipped; upper leaves are tapered
Margins have 8-11 evenly spaced blunt lobes per side, cut about halfway to the midvein, pointed the lobes close together.
nearly touching, often slightly twisted, each with small blunt
teeth or sub-lobes. Blades ruffly, with scattered ong nairs
on both sides. Midvein broad, whitish. strongly depressed
above and protruding below, shallowly U-channeled with ?
faint, thin groove in the center; smaller veins are also strongly
depressed. Petiole very short to absent, wing-channeled
when present. Inflorescence erect, crowded. terminal spikes
with bracts progressively smaller toward the top. Flow-
ers (mid to late summer) 0.7-1 (18-25 mm) long the oase
with a tubular, hairy calyx. The corolla is tubuiar and much
longer, creamy to pale yellow, 2-lipped, the upper lipuonger
and curling over the lower. From the top the spike looks ike
a pinwheel, the flower tips curving clockwise.
HABITAT: Full sun or light shade in swamps. wet mead-
ows. marsh edges, along ponds and lakes. mostly in rich
soils. Native.
FOOD USE: In late spring and early summer the tender
leaves can be eaten raw or cooked. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This tastes much like lousewort (p. 394)
but not as good, and the stems are not nearly as tender. It
blooms three months later and has no basal leaves. This
Emerging spring plants.
species is partly
parasitic and nas
the odd parasitic
piant flavor
WARNING
These
nosoro
plant,
and
when grow
poisons.
Early summe
shoots.
567
1cm BASAL PAIRED LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, AND TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND LEAVES 8 Swamp lousewort Pedicularis lanceolata family Orobanchaceae QUICK nately lobed CHECK: Hairy, erect plant of wetland margins with leaves that are 1000 and ruffled by extremely depressed veins. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: solid with Perennial. Stems clumped, 20-40) (50-100 cm) tall sides (two long, soft hairs curving toward the base, with four grooves and 5-8 Leaves of them more prominent). There are ascending branches in running the down the to both paired, 2-2.5" (5-6.5 cm) long, oblanceolate to lanceolate or long-elliptic, upper third ends, sessile or nearly so. Lower leaves are blunt-tipped; upper leaves are tapered Margins have 8-11 evenly spaced blunt lobes per side, cut about halfway to the midvein, pointed the lobes close together. nearly touching, often slightly twisted, each with small blunt teeth or sub-lobes. Blades ruffly, with scattered ong nairs on both sides. Midvein broad, whitish. strongly depressed above and protruding below, shallowly U-channeled with ? faint, thin groove in the center; smaller veins are also strongly depressed. Petiole very short to absent, wing-channeled when present. Inflorescence erect, crowded. terminal spikes with bracts progressively smaller toward the top. Flow- ers (mid to late summer) 0.7-1 (18-25 mm) long the oase with a tubular, hairy calyx. The corolla is tubuiar and much longer, creamy to pale yellow, 2-lipped, the upper lipuonger and curling over the lower. From the top the spike looks ike a pinwheel, the flower tips curving clockwise. HABITAT: Full sun or light shade in swamps. wet mead- ows. marsh edges, along ponds and lakes. mostly in rich soils. Native. FOOD USE: In late spring and early summer the tender leaves can be eaten raw or cooked. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This tastes much like lousewort (p. 394) but not as good, and the stems are not nearly as tender. It blooms three months later and has no basal leaves. This Emerging spring plants. species is partly parasitic and nas the odd parasitic piant flavor WARNING These nosoro plant, and when grow poisons. Early summe shoots. 567 