BASAL PAIRED AND TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND
LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES
Eclipta prostrata Asteraceae (Composite family)
Yerba de tago
OUIC NECK: Knee high spreading plant with narrow, sessile leaves, stiff-haired
maronit stents and single, white, daisy like flowers. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Annual. Stems single, forking, strongly leaning to creeping or decumbent, round,
sometimes rooting at the nodes, rising to 30" (75 cm) high, 3-4 mm thick, solid,
at first becoming deep maroon, the surface with stiff, white, needle-like hairs tightly
appressed green toward the tip. Leaves paired, 1.2-3.9" (3-10 cm) long, lanceolate to narrowly elliptic, blunt-pointed,
tapered to a narrow sessile base. Terminal leaves, especially in full sun, are often deeply folded along the
midvein. The blade has scattered stiff hairs appressed toward the tip on both sides. New growth (such as you
would eat) has glossier leaves that may not yet have developed hair. Midvein depressed above and protruding
below. There is one secondary vein on each side arising close to the base and running at a low angle, forming
a perimeter vein where the other secondary veins stop. These major veins may be slightly depressed, flat,
or slightly raised; on small terminal leaves they are often obscure. Margins have small, blunt, widely-spaced,
forward-pointed, nipple-tipped teeth. Inflorescence (summer to fall) composite heads in groups of 1-3 borne
on peduncles 5-10 mm long directly from the axil of usually just one leaf per pair. Heads 6-8 mm across, sur-
rounded by 8-10 triangular bracts of varying size, with a row of narrow white rays on the outside; the inside
has tiny disk flowers with 5 white petals and yellow anthers.
HABITAT: Moist and often fertile disturbed ground in full sun; river floodplains, wetland edges, lawns, dis-
turbed meadows and weedy areas. Much more common in the South. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender young leaves and stem tips can be
used raw or cooked, but sparingly, as the flavor is strong.
Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This species is found around the world at
lower latitudes and seems much better known outside the
US. It doesn't even really have a common name in English.
Besides being a well-known leafy green, it is traditionally
used as a medicinal for several purposes, including revers-
ing hair loss. Research has shown that an extract stimulates
hair growth in mice. So make sure to plant some if your mice
aren't hairy enough. AKA false daisy, bhringraj, Eclipta alba,
Young greens for eating.
BASAL PAIRED AND TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVES Eclipta prostrata Asteraceae (Composite family) Yerba de tago OUIC NECK: Knee high spreading plant with narrow, sessile leaves, stiff-haired maronit stents and single, white, daisy like flowers. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Annual. Stems single, forking, strongly leaning to creeping or decumbent, round, sometimes rooting at the nodes, rising to 30" (75 cm) high, 3-4 mm thick, solid, at first becoming deep maroon, the surface with stiff, white, needle-like hairs tightly appressed green toward the tip. Leaves paired, 1.2-3.9" (3-10 cm) long, lanceolate to narrowly elliptic, blunt-pointed, tapered to a narrow sessile base. Terminal leaves, especially in full sun, are often deeply folded along the midvein. The blade has scattered stiff hairs appressed toward the tip on both sides. New growth (such as you would eat) has glossier leaves that may not yet have developed hair. Midvein depressed above and protruding below. There is one secondary vein on each side arising close to the base and running at a low angle, forming a perimeter vein where the other secondary veins stop. These major veins may be slightly depressed, flat, or slightly raised; on small terminal leaves they are often obscure. Margins have small, blunt, widely-spaced, forward-pointed, nipple-tipped teeth. Inflorescence (summer to fall) composite heads in groups of 1-3 borne on peduncles 5-10 mm long directly from the axil of usually just one leaf per pair. Heads 6-8 mm across, sur- rounded by 8-10 triangular bracts of varying size, with a row of narrow white rays on the outside; the inside has tiny disk flowers with 5 white petals and yellow anthers. HABITAT: Moist and often fertile disturbed ground in full sun; river floodplains, wetland edges, lawns, dis- turbed meadows and weedy areas. Much more common in the South. Native. FOOD USE: Tender young leaves and stem tips can be used raw or cooked, but sparingly, as the flavor is strong. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This species is found around the world at lower latitudes and seems much better known outside the US. It doesn't even really have a common name in English. Besides being a well-known leafy green, it is traditionally used as a medicinal for several purposes, including revers- ing hair loss. Research has shown that an extract stimulates hair growth in mice. So make sure to plant some if your mice aren't hairy enough. AKA false daisy, bhringraj, Eclipta alba, Young greens for eating. 