BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVE
PAIRED AND TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND
9 Orache
3
2
genus
Atriplex
family
Amaranthaceae
QUICK CHECK: Erect to creeping herb with unshowy flowers; leaves triangular and often
with backward-pointed lobes; lower leaves paired, the upper alternate. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Annual. Stems 1-4.5 (30-140 cm) long, usually single, erect to prostrate,
angular or with deep grooves, striped, some combination of green and red, solid, hairless,
often coated with soft, granular material. Leaves mostly paired (alternate at the top of the
plant), often held vertically, especially when young, ranging from lanceolate to broadly
triangular-broad leaves generally have two lobes jutting outward at the base. Surfaces hairless, flat, sometimes
with a granular coating. Veins not depressed and sometimes slightly protruding above; they protrude below.
There are 2 major secondary veins arising at or near the base. Margins sometimes entire but usually wavy
or with scattered, broad, dull teeth. Petioles 5-40% of blade length, channeled. Inflorescence a small spike
growing from upper leaf axils. In the lower part of the spike a few flowers may be subtended by miniature
leaves, but above that the spike is denser and leafless. Flowers unshowy, green, and very small, with 5 parts.
Female flowers (and fruit) are subtended by 2 identical triangular or diamond-shaped fleshy bracts with teeth
on the outer edges. These are pressed together and conceal the ripening seed.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Lambsquarters (p. 601) have all the leaves alternate and the seeds are not borne
between triangular bracts.
HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny soil, especially where it is moist and salty. Coastal flats and estuary shores,
seasonal wet spots, drainages, washes, pastures, crop fields, roadsides. Native, but some populations are
weedy and introduced.
the FOOD USE: Gather leafy tops while still tender from spring through midsummer and occasionally later. After
want stems it mixed toughen, with pluck individual leaves. Use in salads or as a potherb. In some cases you will
by hand in late other greens to dilute the saltiness, or boil it and drain off the water. Fruit can be probably
can then be used summer for or autumn, dried, and then rubbed and winnowed (see p.27) to clean the stripped
Conservation 1. porridge or flour like goosefoot or amaranth seeds, but I've only eaten a few seeds. palmfuls. These
COMMENTS: Orache is a superb leafy green-think
of it as pre-salted lambsquarters or spinach. This plant
is very sporadic in occurrence, but is most common
in dry parts of the Great Plains and near the Coast. It
also thrives along heavily salted highways. There
many i'm edible species in this genus, but for this account are
lumping them together. Pronounced OR-ITCH.
568
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, LEAVE PAIRED AND TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND 9 Orache 3 2 genus Atriplex family Amaranthaceae QUICK CHECK: Erect to creeping herb with unshowy flowers; leaves triangular and often with backward-pointed lobes; lower leaves paired, the upper alternate. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Annual. Stems 1-4.5 (30-140 cm) long, usually single, erect to prostrate, angular or with deep grooves, striped, some combination of green and red, solid, hairless, often coated with soft, granular material. Leaves mostly paired (alternate at the top of the plant), often held vertically, especially when young, ranging from lanceolate to broadly triangular-broad leaves generally have two lobes jutting outward at the base. Surfaces hairless, flat, sometimes with a granular coating. Veins not depressed and sometimes slightly protruding above; they protrude below. There are 2 major secondary veins arising at or near the base. Margins sometimes entire but usually wavy or with scattered, broad, dull teeth. Petioles 5-40% of blade length, channeled. Inflorescence a small spike growing from upper leaf axils. In the lower part of the spike a few flowers may be subtended by miniature leaves, but above that the spike is denser and leafless. Flowers unshowy, green, and very small, with 5 parts. Female flowers (and fruit) are subtended by 2 identical triangular or diamond-shaped fleshy bracts with teeth on the outer edges. These are pressed together and conceal the ripening seed. CONFUSING PLANTS: Lambsquarters (p. 601) have all the leaves alternate and the seeds are not borne between triangular bracts. HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny soil, especially where it is moist and salty. Coastal flats and estuary shores, seasonal wet spots, drainages, washes, pastures, crop fields, roadsides. Native, but some populations are weedy and introduced. the FOOD USE: Gather leafy tops while still tender from spring through midsummer and occasionally later. After want stems it mixed toughen, with pluck individual leaves. Use in salads or as a potherb. In some cases you will by hand in late other greens to dilute the saltiness, or boil it and drain off the water. Fruit can be probably can then be used summer for or autumn, dried, and then rubbed and winnowed (see p.27) to clean the stripped Conservation 1. porridge or flour like goosefoot or amaranth seeds, but I've only eaten a few seeds. palmfuls. These COMMENTS: Orache is a superb leafy green-think of it as pre-salted lambsquarters or spinach. This plant is very sporadic in occurrence, but is most common in dry parts of the Great Plains and near the Coast. It also thrives along heavily salted highways. There many i'm edible species in this genus, but for this account are lumping them together. Pronounced OR-ITCH. 568 