BASAL PAIRED LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE,
AND TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND LEAVES
10 Jack-in-the-pulpit
Arisaema triphyllum Araceae (Arum family)
QUICK large, entire CHECK: Straight, erect, thick stem with a pair of compound
leaflets; single hooded flower producing a spike of red fruits. leaves, ID difficulty Nith 1,
DESCRIPTION: or at the Perennial from a corm, sometimes producing offset
parent. Corm tips of thin rhizomes, forming dense colonies of smaller plants corms at its base
the bottom stout, not fibrous, slightly wider than tall, with a single large bud surrounding a
half has numerous roots emanating from a wrinkly skin. Stem single, at the top;
stout, 8-20" (20-50 cm) tall and 0.3-0.8" (8-20 mm) thick, unbranched, solid. The erect,
face The is smooth and hairless with light bloom, mottled purple and green (either color sur- be
lower stem is covered with long, tubular sheaths that eventually give rise to petioles. can Shoot predominant). (not
mentioned here only for comparison) thick, surrounded by a sheath fully encircling the stem that is split edible. less
than halfway to the base; one leaflet points up, two down. Leaves ternately compound with all leaflets sessile
Young plants consist of just a single leaf from the base; mature plants have 2 leaves at the top in a slightly
offset pair, the petioles strongly ascending and rising far above the flower and stem. Leaflets ovate to elliptic
and entire with pointed tips, to 12" 30 cm) long, the blades thin, hairless on both sides. Veins depressed and
not set off by color. Secondary veins several on each side, broadly angled, running straight until just before the
edge, where they join a wavy marginal vein. Petiole thick, round, smooth, not channeled. Inflorescence (early
summer) single on a long, stout, smooth peduncle, a leaf-like structure wrapped into a tube before narrow-
ing into a tapered, pointed hood that rises on one side and arches over the opening. Inside the tube stands
a stout, round-tipped, club-like rachis (spadix) with numerous small, petal-less flowers on its hidden lower
part. The hood (spathe) is usually striped in various mixtures of green, purple, and white. Fruit (fall) bright
red berries, numerous, the sides flattened where they are packed together on the spadix, each pulpy berry
containing 1-3 hard, roundish, whitish seeds.
HABITAT: Deciduous forests with rich soil of moderate moisture. Native.
FOOD USE: The corms can be gathered in the dormant season and used as a starchy food. Conservation 3.
WARNING! Corms contain calcium oxalate raphides (see p. 22) and cannot be eaten unless processed carefully.
COMMENTS: The common name "Indian turnip" seems to preserve some knowledge about this plant's former
importance, yet detailed ethnographic information on its use is lacking. However, its content of raphides is ro
more formidable than other wild species that have been bred into major food crops (such as taro). JITP seems
to be thriving in places where earthworms have eaten all the leaf litter, leaving bare soil An inf prescence is
usually exclusively male or female, but the plants switch genders from year to year based upon the amount
of stored energy in the corm.
NOT
EDIBLE
JITP berries (not edible)
BASAL PAIRED LEAVES ABSENT, STEMS NOT SQUARE, AND TOOTHED, LOBED, OR COMPOUND LEAVES 10 Jack-in-the-pulpit Arisaema triphyllum Araceae (Arum family) QUICK large, entire CHECK: Straight, erect, thick stem with a pair of compound leaflets; single hooded flower producing a spike of red fruits. leaves, ID difficulty Nith 1, DESCRIPTION: or at the Perennial from a corm, sometimes producing offset parent. Corm tips of thin rhizomes, forming dense colonies of smaller plants corms at its base the bottom stout, not fibrous, slightly wider than tall, with a single large bud surrounding a half has numerous roots emanating from a wrinkly skin. Stem single, at the top; stout, 8-20" (20-50 cm) tall and 0.3-0.8" (8-20 mm) thick, unbranched, solid. The erect, face The is smooth and hairless with light bloom, mottled purple and green (either color sur- be lower stem is covered with long, tubular sheaths that eventually give rise to petioles. can Shoot predominant). (not mentioned here only for comparison) thick, surrounded by a sheath fully encircling the stem that is split edible. less than halfway to the base; one leaflet points up, two down. Leaves ternately compound with all leaflets sessile Young plants consist of just a single leaf from the base; mature plants have 2 leaves at the top in a slightly offset pair, the petioles strongly ascending and rising far above the flower and stem. Leaflets ovate to elliptic and entire with pointed tips, to 12" 30 cm) long, the blades thin, hairless on both sides. Veins depressed and not set off by color. Secondary veins several on each side, broadly angled, running straight until just before the edge, where they join a wavy marginal vein. Petiole thick, round, smooth, not channeled. Inflorescence (early summer) single on a long, stout, smooth peduncle, a leaf-like structure wrapped into a tube before narrow- ing into a tapered, pointed hood that rises on one side and arches over the opening. Inside the tube stands a stout, round-tipped, club-like rachis (spadix) with numerous small, petal-less flowers on its hidden lower part. The hood (spathe) is usually striped in various mixtures of green, purple, and white. Fruit (fall) bright red berries, numerous, the sides flattened where they are packed together on the spadix, each pulpy berry containing 1-3 hard, roundish, whitish seeds. HABITAT: Deciduous forests with rich soil of moderate moisture. Native. FOOD USE: The corms can be gathered in the dormant season and used as a starchy food. Conservation 3. WARNING! Corms contain calcium oxalate raphides (see p. 22) and cannot be eaten unless processed carefully. COMMENTS: The common name "Indian turnip" seems to preserve some knowledge about this plant's former importance, yet detailed ethnographic information on its use is lacking. However, its content of raphides is ro more formidable than other wild species that have been bred into major food crops (such as taro). JITP seems to be thriving in places where earthworms have eaten all the leaf litter, leaving bare soil An inf prescence is usually exclusively male or female, but the plants switch genders from year to year based upon the amount of stored energy in the corm. NOT EDIBLE JITP berries (not edible) 