LEAVES ALTERNATEAVESAE
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE
(Continued from previous page.)
velns visible and parallel (see botanical definition of parallel).
Stem Stem wrapped lax with a sheath below each leaf, hairy-fringed where sheath margins meet.
or
or trailing. much branched, leaves <5" (13 cm).
Stem erect and usually unbranched: leaves often >5" (13 cm).
22. Common dayflower
Stem not wrapped In a sheath below each leaf,
23. Tall dayflower
Stem Stems smooth, hairless, with bloom (occasionally hairy at the base); leaf margins hairless.
usually branched; leaves strongly clasping or perfoliate.
or
or
Leaf clasping, stem 2-5' (60-150 cm), fruit a red berry.
Leaf perfoliate, stem less than 20" (50 cm), fruit a green capsule,
24. White twisted-stalk
Stems not branched: leaves sessile to almost clasping.
26. Large bellwort
Stem hairy or ridged, without bloom; leaf margins hairy.
27. Smooth Solomon's seal
Stem ridged, not hairy; leaf margins with stiff, straight hairs.
Stem with gland-tipped hairs; leaf margins with hooked hairs.
28. False Solomon's seal
Stem and leaf with soft appressed hairs; leaf margins with soft hairs.
25. Rosy twisted-stalk
6. Kochia
1
Asparagus
3
Asparagus officinalis
Asparagaceae (Asparagus family)
QUICK CHECK: Point-tipped, solid, hairless shoot with no unfurled leaves; mature plant
branchy with thread-like leaves and round, red fruit. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Identical to cultivated asparagus: clumping perennial that spreads short
distances by a stout rhizome, reaching 3-7 (1-2m) tall. Stem straight, erect, solid, round-
ish, smooth, hairless, green, tough, with numerous much smaller ascending branches;
these again branching freely to make a dense Christmas-tree like form. LYDS prominent,
straw-colored. There is a ridged, brown, triangular sheath 8-14 mm long with a hanging spur-like appendage and
one major thread-like appendage at each major branch juncture; even after falling off these leave conspicuous
bumps on the stem. Leaves 6-20 mm long, extremely thin and thread-like, single or in clumps of 2-3. Inflores-
cence 1-2 flowers on long, drooping, pedicels from branch junctures and axils, each with a bulged joint just past
the middle; many empty pedicels usually persist. Flowers 6-7 mm long, yellow-green, bell-like. with 6 tepals.
the tips reflexed. Fruit a spherical red berry 5-7 mm, not edible.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Members of the genus Baptisia (p. 678) have clumped, spear-like shoots that are
toxic. Baptisia shoots sometimes (but not always) lean and have broader embryonic leaves. The mature stems
are very different in every feature.
(#) April
HABITAT: Roadsides, old fields, meadows; in full sun on well-drained soil, especially loamy sand. Introduced.
(AMP) AMOUNT 1 -
FOOD USE: Gather young shoots by cutting or snapping off at the base; eat raw or cooked like cultivated
asparagus.
your - AND
COMMENTS: This plant looks and tastes like cultivated asparagus, but it's a little better and way more fun.
- - - -
-
It is among the most coveted and beloved of wild vegetables.
COMM
\
-
w
(AM)
we
-
VISA
JAN
,4**
-
-
/
boar
AM
\
the
⑇
/
LEAVES ALTERNATEAVESAE BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE (Continued from previous page.) velns visible and parallel (see botanical definition of parallel). Stem Stem wrapped lax with a sheath below each leaf, hairy-fringed where sheath margins meet. or or trailing. much branched, leaves <5" (13 cm). Stem erect and usually unbranched: leaves often >5" (13 cm). 22. Common dayflower Stem not wrapped In a sheath below each leaf, 23. Tall dayflower Stem Stems smooth, hairless, with bloom (occasionally hairy at the base); leaf margins hairless. usually branched; leaves strongly clasping or perfoliate. or or Leaf clasping, stem 2-5' (60-150 cm), fruit a red berry. Leaf perfoliate, stem less than 20" (50 cm), fruit a green capsule, 24. White twisted-stalk Stems not branched: leaves sessile to almost clasping. 26. Large bellwort Stem hairy or ridged, without bloom; leaf margins hairy. 27. Smooth Solomon's seal Stem ridged, not hairy; leaf margins with stiff, straight hairs. Stem with gland-tipped hairs; leaf margins with hooked hairs. 28. False Solomon's seal Stem and leaf with soft appressed hairs; leaf margins with soft hairs. 25. Rosy twisted-stalk 6. Kochia 1 Asparagus 3 Asparagus officinalis Asparagaceae (Asparagus family) QUICK CHECK: Point-tipped, solid, hairless shoot with no unfurled leaves; mature plant branchy with thread-like leaves and round, red fruit. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Identical to cultivated asparagus: clumping perennial that spreads short distances by a stout rhizome, reaching 3-7 (1-2m) tall. Stem straight, erect, solid, round- ish, smooth, hairless, green, tough, with numerous much smaller ascending branches; these again branching freely to make a dense Christmas-tree like form. LYDS prominent, straw-colored. There is a ridged, brown, triangular sheath 8-14 mm long with a hanging spur-like appendage and one major thread-like appendage at each major branch juncture; even after falling off these leave conspicuous bumps on the stem. Leaves 6-20 mm long, extremely thin and thread-like, single or in clumps of 2-3. Inflores- cence 1-2 flowers on long, drooping, pedicels from branch junctures and axils, each with a bulged joint just past the middle; many empty pedicels usually persist. Flowers 6-7 mm long, yellow-green, bell-like. with 6 tepals. the tips reflexed. Fruit a spherical red berry 5-7 mm, not edible. CONFUSING PLANTS: Members of the genus Baptisia (p. 678) have clumped, spear-like shoots that are toxic. Baptisia shoots sometimes (but not always) lean and have broader embryonic leaves. The mature stems are very different in every feature. (#) April HABITAT: Roadsides, old fields, meadows; in full sun on well-drained soil, especially loamy sand. Introduced. (AMP) AMOUNT 1 - FOOD USE: Gather young shoots by cutting or snapping off at the base; eat raw or cooked like cultivated asparagus. your - AND COMMENTS: This plant looks and tastes like cultivated asparagus, but it's a little better and way more fun. - - - - - It is among the most coveted and beloved of wild vegetables. COMM \ - w (AM) we - VISA JAN ,4** - - / boar AM \ the ⑇ / 