BASAL LEAVES ABSENT,
GROUP 35 BASAL LEAVES ABSENT,
LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE
in the book. Most of these are margins leafy greens, that
but This a is few one have of the edible largest seeds and might or most root occasionally diverse vegetables. groups key A here, few plants such as with lambsquarters variable leaf or ground-cherry.
I
have
placed
in
other
groups
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 35
The key is not your final answer!
Leaf veins not visible or visible and not parallel (see botanical definition of parallel).
Leaves needle-like or thread-like, less than 2 mm wide.
1. Asparagus
Leaves limp and thread-like.
2. Russian tumbleweed
or
Leaves stiff and needle-like.
Leaves succulent, greater than 2 mm wide.
3. Sea-blite
Erect plant with linear leaves.
7. Purslane
or
Prostrate to decumbent plant with spoon-shaped leaves.
Leaves not needie-like, not thread-like, not succuient.
Secondary veins and veinlets invisible or nearly so.
Sap milky. Harebell (p. 336).
Sap not milky.
Plant spreading wider than tall; finely hairy ovate leaves.
8. Prairie tea
or
Plant taller than wide; hairless, very narrow leaves.
Flowers blue; plants more than 20" (50 cm) tall.
9. Blue flax
Flowers yellow; plants less than 14" (36 cm) tall.
10. Stiff yellow flax
Secondary veins indistinct; a discontinuous network of raised veinlets.
11. Horseweed
or
Secondary veins visible, several major ones from the base.
12. Thoroughwax
or
Secondary veins visible, pinnate or no more than 2 from the base.
Leaves with a distinct petiole.
Secondary veins depressed above.
Stem jointed at each node.
or
or
Leaves ovate to elliptic; stem with a large hollow, joints not bulging.
13. Japanese knotweed
Leaves lanceolate; stems almost solid, bulged near each joint.
14. Smartweeds
Stem not jointed at the nodes.
Flowers showy, in racemes.
or
Stems widely branching, clumped, raceme drooping.
or
Stems not branching, colonial, raceme erect.
17. Poke
Flowers unshowy, tiny.
18. Fireweed
or
raspy and sticking to clothing.
Flowers in small clusters mixed with leafy bracts; mature leaves minutely
Flowers in clusters with stiff chaffy bracts; mature leaves not raspy.
19. American pellitory
Plants erect; some inflorescences terminal.
Plants creeping; all inflorescences axillary.
4. Amaranth
Secondary veins not depressed above.
5. Creeping amaranth
flowers Petioles large less than and showy. 5% of blade length: secondary veins less than 30° to the midvein:
midvein; Petiole more flowers than small 20% and of blade unshowy. length; secondary velns greater than 50° to the
20, Bush merning story
Leaves sessile.
Leaves stiff-hairy on the margin.
16,
Willow
Leaves Leaves soft-hairy hairless. on the margin; surfaces velvety from appressed hair,
11. Horseweed
Stems Stems single, clumped, erect, leaning, zigzag, straight, usually unbranched below the inflorescence.
6, Kockia
570 Leaf veins visible and parallel (see botanical definition branchy. of parallel).
21, Bastard toadflex
15. Erect knotweed
See
(Continued on next page.)
key
next
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, GROUP 35 BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE in the book. Most of these are margins leafy greens, that but This a is few one have of the edible largest seeds and might or most root occasionally diverse vegetables. groups key A here, few plants such as with lambsquarters variable leaf or ground-cherry. I have placed in other groups TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 35 The key is not your final answer! Leaf veins not visible or visible and not parallel (see botanical definition of parallel). Leaves needle-like or thread-like, less than 2 mm wide. 1. Asparagus Leaves limp and thread-like. 2. Russian tumbleweed or Leaves stiff and needle-like. Leaves succulent, greater than 2 mm wide. 3. Sea-blite Erect plant with linear leaves. 7. Purslane or Prostrate to decumbent plant with spoon-shaped leaves. Leaves not needie-like, not thread-like, not succuient. Secondary veins and veinlets invisible or nearly so. Sap milky. Harebell (p. 336). Sap not milky. Plant spreading wider than tall; finely hairy ovate leaves. 8. Prairie tea or Plant taller than wide; hairless, very narrow leaves. Flowers blue; plants more than 20" (50 cm) tall. 9. Blue flax Flowers yellow; plants less than 14" (36 cm) tall. 10. Stiff yellow flax Secondary veins indistinct; a discontinuous network of raised veinlets. 11. Horseweed or Secondary veins visible, several major ones from the base. 12. Thoroughwax or Secondary veins visible, pinnate or no more than 2 from the base. Leaves with a distinct petiole. Secondary veins depressed above. Stem jointed at each node. or or Leaves ovate to elliptic; stem with a large hollow, joints not bulging. 13. Japanese knotweed Leaves lanceolate; stems almost solid, bulged near each joint. 14. Smartweeds Stem not jointed at the nodes. Flowers showy, in racemes. or Stems widely branching, clumped, raceme drooping. or Stems not branching, colonial, raceme erect. 17. Poke Flowers unshowy, tiny. 18. Fireweed or raspy and sticking to clothing. Flowers in small clusters mixed with leafy bracts; mature leaves minutely Flowers in clusters with stiff chaffy bracts; mature leaves not raspy. 19. American pellitory Plants erect; some inflorescences terminal. Plants creeping; all inflorescences axillary. 4. Amaranth Secondary veins not depressed above. 5. Creeping amaranth flowers Petioles large less than and showy. 5% of blade length: secondary veins less than 30° to the midvein: midvein; Petiole more flowers than small 20% and of blade unshowy. length; secondary velns greater than 50° to the 20, Bush merning story Leaves sessile. Leaves stiff-hairy on the margin. 16, Willow Leaves Leaves soft-hairy hairless. on the margin; surfaces velvety from appressed hair, 11. Horseweed Stems Stems single, clumped, erect, leaning, zigzag, straight, usually unbranched below the inflorescence. 6, Kockia 570 Leaf veins visible and parallel (see botanical definition branchy. of parallel). 21, Bastard toadflex 15. Erect knotweed See (Continued on next page.) key next 