BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE
3 Sea-blite
2
Suaeda spp.
family Amaranthaceae
QUICK leaves; CHECK: Shin to knee-high plant with small, narrow, pointed, thick succulent
flowers unshowy. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: thick, Annuals. Stems erect to decumbent, 8-34" (20-86 cm) tall and
the surface hairless and glaucous, green with darker green or purplish lines 2-7 when mm
young, graying and becoming tough with age, not jointed, usually bushy with ascend-
ing, often red-tipped branches. Leaves needle-like, densely packed on new many branches,
alternate (the lowest ones may be paired), 0.4-1.8" (10-46 mm) long, often curved, pointed but not stiff
needle-sharp, hairless and often glaucous, sessile but not clasping, thick and succulent. Leaf cross-section or
nearly flat to slightly channeled above, rounded below. Lower leaves wither and droop on older plants. inflo-
rescence many terminal spikes, the flowers sessile, solitary or in small clusters in the axils of broader. shorter
leaves. Flowers tiny and irregular with a 5-lobed calyx and 5 light yellowish sepals, one or more of which is
enlarged. The sepals persist after pollination and enclose the tiny, round, single-seeded fruit.
SPECIES: S. linearis is our tallest species, the stem usually erect and becoming rigid, almost woody with
maturity. The sepals of the fruit are keeled on the back. It is native. S. maritima is shorter and more weakly
erect; the sepals of the fruit are rounded on the back. This species has native and introduced populations.
which have been divided by some into separate species. S. depressa has creeping stems-only the branches
are erect. This species has also been subdivided by some taxonomists.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Russian tumbleweed is a plant of dry land that has stiff, sharp leaf tips.
HABITAT: Salty soil in full sun: upper edges of beaches where some organic matter is deposited, sait marshes.
and tidal wetlands. Suaeda depressa is also found in salty inland basins.
FOOD USE: Gather tender stem tips and leaves from spring through mid summer Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: These are unpleasantly over-salty when raw but make a nice vegetable after boiling and drain
ing to reduce the saltiness, or when mixed with other vegetables.
573
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE 3 Sea-blite 2 Suaeda spp. family Amaranthaceae QUICK leaves; CHECK: Shin to knee-high plant with small, narrow, pointed, thick succulent flowers unshowy. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: thick, Annuals. Stems erect to decumbent, 8-34" (20-86 cm) tall and the surface hairless and glaucous, green with darker green or purplish lines 2-7 when mm young, graying and becoming tough with age, not jointed, usually bushy with ascend- ing, often red-tipped branches. Leaves needle-like, densely packed on new many branches, alternate (the lowest ones may be paired), 0.4-1.8" (10-46 mm) long, often curved, pointed but not stiff needle-sharp, hairless and often glaucous, sessile but not clasping, thick and succulent. Leaf cross-section or nearly flat to slightly channeled above, rounded below. Lower leaves wither and droop on older plants. inflo- rescence many terminal spikes, the flowers sessile, solitary or in small clusters in the axils of broader. shorter leaves. Flowers tiny and irregular with a 5-lobed calyx and 5 light yellowish sepals, one or more of which is enlarged. The sepals persist after pollination and enclose the tiny, round, single-seeded fruit. SPECIES: S. linearis is our tallest species, the stem usually erect and becoming rigid, almost woody with maturity. The sepals of the fruit are keeled on the back. It is native. S. maritima is shorter and more weakly erect; the sepals of the fruit are rounded on the back. This species has native and introduced populations. which have been divided by some into separate species. S. depressa has creeping stems-only the branches are erect. This species has also been subdivided by some taxonomists. CONFUSING PLANTS: Russian tumbleweed is a plant of dry land that has stiff, sharp leaf tips. HABITAT: Salty soil in full sun: upper edges of beaches where some organic matter is deposited, sait marshes. and tidal wetlands. Suaeda depressa is also found in salty inland basins. FOOD USE: Gather tender stem tips and leaves from spring through mid summer Conservation 2. COMMENTS: These are unpleasantly over-salty when raw but make a nice vegetable after boiling and drain ing to reduce the saltiness, or when mixed with other vegetables. 573 