BASAL LEAVES ABSENT,
2 Russian tumbleweed
3
Salsola tragus family Amaranthaceae
QUICK CHECK: Bushy, spreading herb with needle-like leaves with stiff, sharp tips.
ID difficulty 1.
Bushy, spreading, annual 1.5-3.5' (45-105 cm) tall and about Stems as erect, wide,
DESCRIPTION: off at the base in late summer or autumn to form a tumbleweed.
breaking solid, to 0.6" (15 min) thick, strongly tapered, with darkened and often purple-topped base; lower
single, and scattered, short, stiff hairs. Branches numerous, beginning at the
branches ridges longest, these spreading to weakly ascending and then sweeping up at the tips. The top of each
branch juncture is purple. Leaves alternate, tufted on short spurs, most of which point vertically, needle-like, to
mm wide, bluish green, with scattered minute (nearly invisible) hairs. Leaves have a thin, colorless sheath
at 1 the base, especially the outer leaf in a tuft. In cross section the leaves are round with a tiny groove on the
upper/inside surface. At first they are soft and fleshy, but upon maturing become stiff and painful to touch.
Inflorescence mostly single in the axils of small modified leaves (with widened bases) at the ends of the
branches; numerous such axillary flowers are evenly spaced at branch tips. Flowers tiny and unshowy, lack-
ing petals, reddish in the center. Fruits dry with a thin, papery flesh and a single dark brown, elongated seed.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Sea-blite leaves do not become stiff and sharp.
HABITAT: Well-drained, disturbed soil in full sun; mostly crop fields, pastures, urban areas, railroads, road-
sides, and upper sea beaches. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Pick young stem tips when tender and the leaves are soft in early summer. Boil or steam before
eating.
COMMENTS: This is one of the common "tumbleweeds" of the Great Plains, and perhaps the best known.
The young stems are surprisingly good, and like amaranth they soften to a remarkable degree when cooked.
While less abundant farther east, it is still locally common. AKA Russian-thistle, Salsola kali.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, 2 Russian tumbleweed 3 Salsola tragus family Amaranthaceae QUICK CHECK: Bushy, spreading herb with needle-like leaves with stiff, sharp tips. ID difficulty 1. Bushy, spreading, annual 1.5-3.5' (45-105 cm) tall and about Stems as erect, wide, DESCRIPTION: off at the base in late summer or autumn to form a tumbleweed. breaking solid, to 0.6" (15 min) thick, strongly tapered, with darkened and often purple-topped base; lower single, and scattered, short, stiff hairs. Branches numerous, beginning at the branches ridges longest, these spreading to weakly ascending and then sweeping up at the tips. The top of each branch juncture is purple. Leaves alternate, tufted on short spurs, most of which point vertically, needle-like, to mm wide, bluish green, with scattered minute (nearly invisible) hairs. Leaves have a thin, colorless sheath at 1 the base, especially the outer leaf in a tuft. In cross section the leaves are round with a tiny groove on the upper/inside surface. At first they are soft and fleshy, but upon maturing become stiff and painful to touch. Inflorescence mostly single in the axils of small modified leaves (with widened bases) at the ends of the branches; numerous such axillary flowers are evenly spaced at branch tips. Flowers tiny and unshowy, lack- ing petals, reddish in the center. Fruits dry with a thin, papery flesh and a single dark brown, elongated seed. CONFUSING PLANTS: Sea-blite leaves do not become stiff and sharp. HABITAT: Well-drained, disturbed soil in full sun; mostly crop fields, pastures, urban areas, railroads, road- sides, and upper sea beaches. Introduced. FOOD USE: Pick young stem tips when tender and the leaves are soft in early summer. Boil or steam before eating. COMMENTS: This is one of the common "tumbleweeds" of the Great Plains, and perhaps the best known. The young stems are surprisingly good, and like amaranth they soften to a remarkable degree when cooked. While less abundant farther east, it is still locally common. AKA Russian-thistle, Salsola kali. 