BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES
Amaranth
3
3
NG-215
4
Amaranthus
spp.
family
Amaranthaceae
HECK: Brani hing herbs with tapered, gently-ridged stems; alternate, entire
QUICK spiky fusters of anshowy flowers. ID difficulty 2.
leaves, annuals to 7' (2.1 m) tall, often with major ascending ridged branches. but not
DESCRIPTION: Erect tapered, green (sometimes with reddish stripes), solid, (1.3-20 cm)
Stems robust, strongly fine hair but some species hairless. Leaves alternate, 0.5-8" tapered or
long, entire. the tips blunt to pointed. Surfaces hairless or hairy. Midvein depressed almost
sharply, usually thin, with spoon-shaped to narrowly elliptic or lanceolate, the bases above
Collec
acuminate, below; secondary veins likewise, 45-55° to the midvein, running
and protruding intact before curving forward and becoming faint. Petioles range from very short or t
to the margins channeled. Inflorescence dense terminal and axillary clusters (spikes, racemes, 1
by blade maturity length, usually encompassing a large portion of the upper plant with few leaves, the leaves
smaller (often absent) toward the tips. Flowers tiny, not showy, with o-5 (usually 3-5) chaffy and
sepais that are green in the center and papery on the edges, often stiff-prickly at maturity with a harde
like tip. Stamens 3-5. Fruit a thin-walled, bladder-like structure 2-3 mm long with 2-3 small beaks a
holding a single seed. Seeds somewhat flattened, the edges rounded or sharp, shaped like a deform
the surface smooth and hardened, brown to nearly black.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Eastern black nightshade (p. 606) leaves often have blunt teeth and usua
coppery to purple sheen on their lower surface.
HABITAT: Disturbed, rich soil in full sun. Abundant in many human-made habitats, such as gardens, CI
compost heaps, and building sites. Also riverbanks, shores, wetlands, disturbed floodplains and washe
FOOD USE: Gather the greens and young stems whenever they are tender-mostly late spring
summer. They can be eaten raw but are much better cooked, which softens them considerably. Ha
(top left) Green Amaranth
A hybridus is a common weed
similar to redroot pigweed
In general appearance but is
smoother and hairless with nar-
rower leaves and longer peti-
bles. Flower clusters are more
elongated with fewer branches.
In my opinion it is somewhat
better as a vegetable.
(right) Redroot Pigweed
# retroflexus is probably the
most widespread species. It
has broad leaves, hairy stems
at d leaves, and very spiky,
busny Bowerheads The upper
1001 and lower stem are dis-
hine red
A powelh and
t pulmen off very similar spe
CIES that resemble slender ver
Sibte of green amaranth Their
Ulahr and stems are stim
11,61. the follage IS sporset and
the petioles all proportionately
longer The hower Clusters dif
for wheng and norlow
carrity broncing and drooping
DI akking allics shiff and
Great Bon of men all
with les ally abundant
574
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES Amaranth 3 3 NG-215 4 Amaranthus spp. family Amaranthaceae HECK: Brani hing herbs with tapered, gently-ridged stems; alternate, entire QUICK spiky fusters of anshowy flowers. ID difficulty 2. leaves, annuals to 7' (2.1 m) tall, often with major ascending ridged branches. but not DESCRIPTION: Erect tapered, green (sometimes with reddish stripes), solid, (1.3-20 cm) Stems robust, strongly fine hair but some species hairless. Leaves alternate, 0.5-8" tapered or long, entire. the tips blunt to pointed. Surfaces hairless or hairy. Midvein depressed almost sharply, usually thin, with spoon-shaped to narrowly elliptic or lanceolate, the bases above Collec acuminate, below; secondary veins likewise, 45-55° to the midvein, running and protruding intact before curving forward and becoming faint. Petioles range from very short or t to the margins channeled. Inflorescence dense terminal and axillary clusters (spikes, racemes, 1 by blade maturity length, usually encompassing a large portion of the upper plant with few leaves, the leaves smaller (often absent) toward the tips. Flowers tiny, not showy, with o-5 (usually 3-5) chaffy and sepais that are green in the center and papery on the edges, often stiff-prickly at maturity with a harde like tip. Stamens 3-5. Fruit a thin-walled, bladder-like structure 2-3 mm long with 2-3 small beaks a holding a single seed. Seeds somewhat flattened, the edges rounded or sharp, shaped like a deform the surface smooth and hardened, brown to nearly black. CONFUSING PLANTS: Eastern black nightshade (p. 606) leaves often have blunt teeth and usua coppery to purple sheen on their lower surface. HABITAT: Disturbed, rich soil in full sun. Abundant in many human-made habitats, such as gardens, CI compost heaps, and building sites. Also riverbanks, shores, wetlands, disturbed floodplains and washe FOOD USE: Gather the greens and young stems whenever they are tender-mostly late spring summer. They can be eaten raw but are much better cooked, which softens them considerably. Ha (top left) Green Amaranth A hybridus is a common weed similar to redroot pigweed In general appearance but is smoother and hairless with nar- rower leaves and longer peti- bles. Flower clusters are more elongated with fewer branches. In my opinion it is somewhat better as a vegetable. (right) Redroot Pigweed # retroflexus is probably the most widespread species. It has broad leaves, hairy stems at d leaves, and very spiky, busny Bowerheads The upper 1001 and lower stem are dis- hine red A powelh and t pulmen off very similar spe CIES that resemble slender ver Sibte of green amaranth Their Ulahr and stems are stim 11,61. the follage IS sporset and the petioles all proportionately longer The hower Clusters dif for wheng and norlow carrity broncing and drooping DI akking allics shiff and Great Bon of men all with les ally abundant 574 