LEAVES
ALTERNATE
AND
ENTIRE
seeds in fall to early winter by beating the ripe, dry
seedheads over a tarp or tub. Dry, rub, and winnow
(see p. 27). Amaranth grain from the wild tastes almost
identical to that of the cultivated crop, but is much
darker. It should be ground or soaked and long-boiled
to break up the seedcoat and facilitate digestion before
boking into porridge or using the flour. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is one of our most common and
delicious wild greens-one of the first plants any for-
ager should learn. We can these in large quantity for
winter eating. Some of the better and most common
amaranth species are listed here:
(both photos) Water-hemp Amaranthus tuberculatus
is a species of floodplains, mucky river margins, and
very rich farmland. It has hairless stems and is tall and
lanky. The leaves are on long petioles, and while the
lower ones may be broadly elliptic, the upper ones are
very narrow but still blunt at the tip. Inflorescences
are long, narrow, and not drooping.
Creeping amaranth
2
5
Amaranthus blitoides
family
Amaranthaceae
QUICK CHECK: Creeping herb with thick stems and crowded, alternate, spoon-shaped
leaves with whitish margins. ID difficulty 2.
Creeping annual, sometimes forming mats; usually ground-hugging from the base, in
DESCRIPTION: be weakly erect near the tip. Stems usually multiple reddish, solid,
full sun but stems cm) long, may usually hairless but sometimes sparsely hairy, light and mostly short,
roundish up to occasionally 32" (8o in cross major; section short but with flowering a few branches faint grooves. have acute Branches very reduced or tapered many leaves. bases, Leaves 0.3-1.8" alternate, (8-46 mm) spoon-shaped protruding long. The
to but elliptic hairless with blunt on both tips sides (sometimes and sparkly notched) above. and Midvein an branched, and major terminating veins depressed before the above margin: and into veinlets the blade. not
evident. below; blade is secondary Margins drab, entire, veins in about traced dense, 45° in spiny, whitish. to the axillary midvein, Petioles clusters rarely flat, 30% that of are blade usually length, shorter gradually than cracks, widening the roadsides, petiole. pastures,
Flowers tiny Well-drained and disturbed soil in full sun: Native. prairie dog towns, sidewalk well.
FOOD HABITAT: urban lots, USE: gardens. Gather More tender common leafy tips westward. and eat them cooked. Because they are low to the Conservation ground, wash 1. This
COMMENTS: $
one of the least desir-
able species of ama-
ranth due to the small
size and low-growing
habit, but it's still not
a bad green when lush
and abundant. isepar
rated it from the other
amaranths because
the form is so differ-
ent AKA prostrate
pigweed. 4. graecizans.
575
LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE seeds in fall to early winter by beating the ripe, dry seedheads over a tarp or tub. Dry, rub, and winnow (see p. 27). Amaranth grain from the wild tastes almost identical to that of the cultivated crop, but is much darker. It should be ground or soaked and long-boiled to break up the seedcoat and facilitate digestion before boking into porridge or using the flour. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is one of our most common and delicious wild greens-one of the first plants any for- ager should learn. We can these in large quantity for winter eating. Some of the better and most common amaranth species are listed here: (both photos) Water-hemp Amaranthus tuberculatus is a species of floodplains, mucky river margins, and very rich farmland. It has hairless stems and is tall and lanky. The leaves are on long petioles, and while the lower ones may be broadly elliptic, the upper ones are very narrow but still blunt at the tip. Inflorescences are long, narrow, and not drooping. Creeping amaranth 2 5 Amaranthus blitoides family Amaranthaceae QUICK CHECK: Creeping herb with thick stems and crowded, alternate, spoon-shaped leaves with whitish margins. ID difficulty 2. Creeping annual, sometimes forming mats; usually ground-hugging from the base, in DESCRIPTION: be weakly erect near the tip. Stems usually multiple reddish, solid, full sun but stems cm) long, may usually hairless but sometimes sparsely hairy, light and mostly short, roundish up to occasionally 32" (8o in cross major; section short but with flowering a few branches faint grooves. have acute Branches very reduced or tapered many leaves. bases, Leaves 0.3-1.8" alternate, (8-46 mm) spoon-shaped protruding long. The to but elliptic hairless with blunt on both tips sides (sometimes and sparkly notched) above. and Midvein an branched, and major terminating veins depressed before the above margin: and into veinlets the blade. not evident. below; blade is secondary Margins drab, entire, veins in about traced dense, 45° in spiny, whitish. to the axillary midvein, Petioles clusters rarely flat, 30% that of are blade usually length, shorter gradually than cracks, widening the roadsides, petiole. pastures, Flowers tiny Well-drained and disturbed soil in full sun: Native. prairie dog towns, sidewalk well. FOOD HABITAT: urban lots, USE: gardens. Gather More tender common leafy tips westward. and eat them cooked. Because they are low to the Conservation ground, wash 1. This COMMENTS: $ one of the least desir- able species of ama- ranth due to the small size and low-growing habit, but it's still not a bad green when lush and abundant. isepar rated it from the other amaranths because the form is so differ- ent AKA prostrate pigweed. 4. graecizans. 575 