1cm
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE
7
Purslane
3
2
IWE-309
Portulaca oleracea family Portulacaceae
QUICK aves. ID CHECK: difficulty Trailing 1. hairless plant with thick, succulent stams and blunt inc
DESCRIPTION: is dense. Prostrate, creeping annual, sometimes with the tips erect where
Stems round, thick, succulent, hairless, reddish, branching repeatedly Leaves vegetation
and succulent, up to 0.8" (2 cm) long, obovate or spatulate, entire, the tips thick
alternate but crowded toward the branch tips, the surface smooth with veins invisible rounded,
scarcely evident. Petioles 5-10% of blade length, flat above and rounded below. Flowers or (throughout summer)
open only in the morning; sessile and single, 5 mm across, flat with 5 broad, touching or overlapping yellow
petals that are cleft or indented at the tip. Fruit a small, egg-shaped capsule containing several black seeds
CONFUSING PLANTS: Various creeping spurges of the genus Euphorbia are similar in form but have stems
and leaves that are thinner and not succulent. They may also have hairy stems, notched leaf tips, leaves with
a dark central spot, and milky sap.
HABITAT: Disturbed sunny soil. Common weed of gardens, yards, flower beds, agricultural fields, road
shoulders, riverbanks, construction sites. Does especially well on rich, sandy soil. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather tender growth and use raw or cooked. Stems and leaves remain succulent and tender
much longer than most greens. Be cautious of dirt, as the plant is low-growing; however, being hairless, it
washes easily. Seeds are very labor-intensive to use. Gather whole mature plants and hang in bundles to dry;
seeds will ripen after plants are cut and can then be shaken onto a sheet. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: The thick, crisp leaves and stems have a slightly tangy flavor and are delectable, although the
texture is somewhat mucilaginous.
This plant has long been cultivated
in parts of Asia for its leaves and
sometimes seeds. Purslane is
extremely high in iron. Because this
plant uses CAM photosynthesis, it
builds up acids in its tissues which
peak late on sunny mornings. This
is when the leaves taste tangiest.
1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE 7 Purslane 3 2 IWE-309 Portulaca oleracea family Portulacaceae QUICK aves. ID CHECK: difficulty Trailing 1. hairless plant with thick, succulent stams and blunt inc DESCRIPTION: is dense. Prostrate, creeping annual, sometimes with the tips erect where Stems round, thick, succulent, hairless, reddish, branching repeatedly Leaves vegetation and succulent, up to 0.8" (2 cm) long, obovate or spatulate, entire, the tips thick alternate but crowded toward the branch tips, the surface smooth with veins invisible rounded, scarcely evident. Petioles 5-10% of blade length, flat above and rounded below. Flowers or (throughout summer) open only in the morning; sessile and single, 5 mm across, flat with 5 broad, touching or overlapping yellow petals that are cleft or indented at the tip. Fruit a small, egg-shaped capsule containing several black seeds CONFUSING PLANTS: Various creeping spurges of the genus Euphorbia are similar in form but have stems and leaves that are thinner and not succulent. They may also have hairy stems, notched leaf tips, leaves with a dark central spot, and milky sap. HABITAT: Disturbed sunny soil. Common weed of gardens, yards, flower beds, agricultural fields, road shoulders, riverbanks, construction sites. Does especially well on rich, sandy soil. Native. FOOD USE: Gather tender growth and use raw or cooked. Stems and leaves remain succulent and tender much longer than most greens. Be cautious of dirt, as the plant is low-growing; however, being hairless, it washes easily. Seeds are very labor-intensive to use. Gather whole mature plants and hang in bundles to dry; seeds will ripen after plants are cut and can then be shaken onto a sheet. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: The thick, crisp leaves and stems have a slightly tangy flavor and are delectable, although the texture is somewhat mucilaginous. This plant has long been cultivated in parts of Asia for its leaves and sometimes seeds. Purslane is extremely high in iron. Because this plant uses CAM photosynthesis, it builds up acids in its tissues which peak late on sunny mornings. This is when the leaves taste tangiest. 