2
6
Kochia Kochia scoparia 2 family Amaranthaceae
CHECK: Densely branched, erect plants with striped 1. stems; narrow, finely-hairy
QUICK flowers in the leaf axils. ID difficulty
leaves; stemless 2-6' tall, profusely branching at the base as well as striped above,
DESCRIPTION: Erect annual maturity. Stems solid with smooth-topped ridges, green, surface-the
forming a tumbleweed at All parts have fine, soft hairs lying flat against the the leaves.
with purple or darker green. there is more on the branches, and more still Leaves on alternate,
Much more com-
least hair is on the ascending stems, at first, the tips eventually sweeping upward. is a much longer leaf
mon westward.
Branches slightly branches that are spreading or drooping; there both ends, 1-3"
tufted on spur-like Blades narrow-elliptic to long-lanceolate, tapered to
at the branch base. symmetrical, soft and velvety (especially when young) with 3 prominent and hairy. veins, Lower which leaves remain have
separate from but most upper leaves are sessile. Inflorescence a terminal spike interrupted than the flower
(2.5-8 cm) long, base to tip, protruding and flat-bottomed below. Margins entire by small, linear
short leaves petioles, (bracts) that have very long hair on the margins; bracts are several times longer or
fruit and often lean over it but do not wrap tightly around it. Flowers inconspicuous, borne singly or in pairs
in bract axils, flat-faced with 5 spreading, whitish-green, petal-like lobes with scurfy edges. Fruit has 5 thick
lobes or wings and a very thin flesh over a seed shaped like a flattened coil 1 mm across. When the seed is
mature, the tops have cottony tufts on each fruiting spike; these persist after the seed is removed. Mature,
fruiting plants appear scarcely leafy and lose the stripes on the stems.
HABITAT: Dry, sunny, disturbed soil. Roadsides, construction sites, banks, cropland. Introduced. East of the
Great Plains it is mostly confined to highways and railroads.
FOOD USE: Gather young tender leafy tops from late spring through midsummer and use as a potherb. Ripe
seeds can be stripped by hand, dried, rubbed, and winnowed, then used as a gruel, grain, or flour. The seeds
should be soaked and rinsed before eating.
COMMENTS: It baffles me that an edible plant so widespread and common remains so obscure. At a glance
this herb resembles a bushy, narrow-leaved lambsquarters, and it can be thought of similarly as food-although
the leaves of kochia toughen more as they mature. AKA summer-cypress.
576
2 6 Kochia Kochia scoparia 2 family Amaranthaceae CHECK: Densely branched, erect plants with striped 1. stems; narrow, finely-hairy QUICK flowers in the leaf axils. ID difficulty leaves; stemless 2-6' tall, profusely branching at the base as well as striped above, DESCRIPTION: Erect annual maturity. Stems solid with smooth-topped ridges, green, surface-the forming a tumbleweed at All parts have fine, soft hairs lying flat against the the leaves. with purple or darker green. there is more on the branches, and more still Leaves on alternate, Much more com- least hair is on the ascending stems, at first, the tips eventually sweeping upward. is a much longer leaf mon westward. Branches slightly branches that are spreading or drooping; there both ends, 1-3" tufted on spur-like Blades narrow-elliptic to long-lanceolate, tapered to at the branch base. symmetrical, soft and velvety (especially when young) with 3 prominent and hairy. veins, Lower which leaves remain have separate from but most upper leaves are sessile. Inflorescence a terminal spike interrupted than the flower (2.5-8 cm) long, base to tip, protruding and flat-bottomed below. Margins entire by small, linear short leaves petioles, (bracts) that have very long hair on the margins; bracts are several times longer or fruit and often lean over it but do not wrap tightly around it. Flowers inconspicuous, borne singly or in pairs in bract axils, flat-faced with 5 spreading, whitish-green, petal-like lobes with scurfy edges. Fruit has 5 thick lobes or wings and a very thin flesh over a seed shaped like a flattened coil 1 mm across. When the seed is mature, the tops have cottony tufts on each fruiting spike; these persist after the seed is removed. Mature, fruiting plants appear scarcely leafy and lose the stripes on the stems. HABITAT: Dry, sunny, disturbed soil. Roadsides, construction sites, banks, cropland. Introduced. East of the Great Plains it is mostly confined to highways and railroads. FOOD USE: Gather young tender leafy tops from late spring through midsummer and use as a potherb. Ripe seeds can be stripped by hand, dried, rubbed, and winnowed, then used as a gruel, grain, or flour. The seeds should be soaked and rinsed before eating. COMMENTS: It baffles me that an edible plant so widespread and common remains so obscure. At a glance this herb resembles a bushy, narrow-leaved lambsquarters, and it can be thought of similarly as food-although the leaves of kochia toughen more as they mature. AKA summer-cypress. 576 