mm
1cm
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE
Flay pods and ripe teeds
long and 2-4 mm wide, sessile, overlapping,
appressed, linear to narrowly elliptic, tapered at
both ends, pointed, flat, hairless. The midvein
is scarcely evident, and other veins are invisible.
Inflorescence a branching panicle of multiple
racemes, the pedicels 0.3-0.5" (8-13 mm) long,
the buds egg-shaped. Flowers (early to mid
summer) 0.7-0.9" (18-23 mm) across, opening
n the morning and usually closing by afternoon. Sepals 5, oval, green, entire, 3 long, the tips blunt-pointed.
Petals 5, very thin, pale to bright blue with darker radiating veins, narrow at the base and broad with a slight
notch at the tip. Pods nearly spherical, very symmetrical, 5 mm long, ripening to straw color and splitting into
0 sharp-tipped sections. The pods contain up to 10 seeds, flattened and teardrop-shaped like domestic flax
seeds, but darker brown to black and about 1/3 the size.
HABITAT: Well-drained, sunny, disturbed soil, especially where poor and sandy or gravelly. Roadsides, steep
slopes, vacant lots, river banks, old fields, etc. Introduced and native.
:OOD USE: The seeds can be used like those of domestic flax. Strip ripe pods by hand from mid to late sum-
mer; dry pods need to be beaten and then winnowed to separate the chaff. Tender greens and flower buds
are bitter and distasteful. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: Linum perenne is the wild flax from which domestic flax L. usitatissimum was derived. The nearly
dentical native blue flax is sometimes separated as L. lewisii, but the differences are minor. Flaxes are some of
of our most attractive wildflowers. There are several other native flax species, some with yellow flowers,
inknown edibility. I have only tried the following:
Related edible:
10 Stiff yellow flax
Linum rigidum/berlandieri
3
3
3
This native flax is
sometimes divided
into two similar
species. It is an
annual with stiff,
erect stems that
only reaches 6-12" (15-30 cm) in height,
found on dry prairies, roadsides, and
disturbed fields. There are paired leaves
near the stem base. The flowers bloom in
spring and are arranged in a flat-topped
cluster at the apex. The petals are yel-
OW sometimes (especially in L. berland-
eri) coppery-orange at the base. I have
not eaten the ripe seeds of stiff yellow
flax, but the tender tips, flowers, and
flower buds are excellent
579
mm 1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE Flay pods and ripe teeds long and 2-4 mm wide, sessile, overlapping, appressed, linear to narrowly elliptic, tapered at both ends, pointed, flat, hairless. The midvein is scarcely evident, and other veins are invisible. Inflorescence a branching panicle of multiple racemes, the pedicels 0.3-0.5" (8-13 mm) long, the buds egg-shaped. Flowers (early to mid summer) 0.7-0.9" (18-23 mm) across, opening n the morning and usually closing by afternoon. Sepals 5, oval, green, entire, 3 long, the tips blunt-pointed. Petals 5, very thin, pale to bright blue with darker radiating veins, narrow at the base and broad with a slight notch at the tip. Pods nearly spherical, very symmetrical, 5 mm long, ripening to straw color and splitting into 0 sharp-tipped sections. The pods contain up to 10 seeds, flattened and teardrop-shaped like domestic flax seeds, but darker brown to black and about 1/3 the size. HABITAT: Well-drained, sunny, disturbed soil, especially where poor and sandy or gravelly. Roadsides, steep slopes, vacant lots, river banks, old fields, etc. Introduced and native. :OOD USE: The seeds can be used like those of domestic flax. Strip ripe pods by hand from mid to late sum- mer; dry pods need to be beaten and then winnowed to separate the chaff. Tender greens and flower buds are bitter and distasteful. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: Linum perenne is the wild flax from which domestic flax L. usitatissimum was derived. The nearly dentical native blue flax is sometimes separated as L. lewisii, but the differences are minor. Flaxes are some of of our most attractive wildflowers. There are several other native flax species, some with yellow flowers, inknown edibility. I have only tried the following: Related edible: 10 Stiff yellow flax Linum rigidum/berlandieri 3 3 3 This native flax is sometimes divided into two similar species. It is an annual with stiff, erect stems that only reaches 6-12" (15-30 cm) in height, found on dry prairies, roadsides, and disturbed fields. There are paired leaves near the stem base. The flowers bloom in spring and are arranged in a flat-topped cluster at the apex. The petals are yel- OW sometimes (especially in L. berland- eri) coppery-orange at the base. I have not eaten the ripe seeds of stiff yellow flax, but the tender tips, flowers, and flower buds are excellent 579 