BASAL LEAVES ABSENT,
8
Prairie Croton monanthogyna tea Euphorbiaceae (Spurge family) of
flat-topped herb with small, entire, blunt leaves difficulty vary- 2.
QUICK CHECK: thin Low, zigzag spreading, stems; flowers evenly distributed in leaf axils. branching ID widely,
ing size on very Annual with a single stem, unbranched at first Pleasantly but soon but moderately
DESCRIPTION: spreading somewhat wider. part dull
the plant to 24" (60 cm) tall rigid, and solid, to 5 mm thick, strongly zigzag, part the green lower or brown-
green aromatic. with Stem a broken tough, layer thin, of of brown tiny appressed cuticle on the hairs. outside, Leaves the alternate upper but clustered thin, near gray-green, branch tips, 0.4-0.9" densely
ish with scattered clumps abrupt at the base and blunt-tipped, the midvein and
(10-23 mm) long, ovate, entire, rounded hairs below, or less densely above. Veins obscure except depressed above
covered with very fine appressed near the base, and occasionally another pair near the tip; short-stemmed these are clusters from
and protruding Flowers below. tiny with a 5-lobed green calyx and zero (female) or 3-8 (male) white with 5 linear sepals
2 secondary veins arising Petioles thin, 30-60% of blade length. Inflorescence small, petals, the stamens
leaf axils. the petais. Fruit 3 mm long, green, egg-shaped except angled slightly, seed; there is a white
about extending half beyond the fruit length; a persistent style protrudes at the tip. Each contains a single
outer layer, a blackish seedshell, and whitish kernel.
HABITAT: Dry, ореп, sunny sites; fields, roadsides, vacant lots, brushy areas, lightly used pastures, edges
of parking lots, dry prairies-especially where disturbed. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather leaves at any time during the growing season. Pour boiling water over fresh or dried
leaves and steep for tea. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This is abundant in much of its range and does well in areas of heavy human use. It lines the
expressways in the Dallas area, looking like miniature live-oak bonsai trees. The tea is easy to collect and
pleasant to drink.
9 Blue flax
2
Linum perenne family Linaceae
linear, stestle leaves lumped, and bright linee high, blue hairless 5-petated herb flowers. with thin ID stems and numerous small,
leaning, DESCRIPTION: think with round, fibrous tough, Perennial rigid, with solid, many smooth, stems hairless, from a tough woody difficulty base. 2. Stems erect to
on and often in the upper outer third- bark. -rarely They have between. ascending branches 18-24" (46-60 occasionally cm) tall and 2-6 mm
578 young stems, evenly distributed all the way up Leaves to the alternate, inflorescence, numerous, 0.4-1,4" very near (10-35 crowded the base mm)
Occasional out-
side mapped area
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, 8 Prairie Croton monanthogyna tea Euphorbiaceae (Spurge family) of flat-topped herb with small, entire, blunt leaves difficulty vary- 2. QUICK CHECK: thin Low, zigzag spreading, stems; flowers evenly distributed in leaf axils. branching ID widely, ing size on very Annual with a single stem, unbranched at first Pleasantly but soon but moderately DESCRIPTION: spreading somewhat wider. part dull the plant to 24" (60 cm) tall rigid, and solid, to 5 mm thick, strongly zigzag, part the green lower or brown- green aromatic. with Stem a broken tough, layer thin, of of brown tiny appressed cuticle on the hairs. outside, Leaves the alternate upper but clustered thin, near gray-green, branch tips, 0.4-0.9" densely ish with scattered clumps abrupt at the base and blunt-tipped, the midvein and (10-23 mm) long, ovate, entire, rounded hairs below, or less densely above. Veins obscure except depressed above covered with very fine appressed near the base, and occasionally another pair near the tip; short-stemmed these are clusters from and protruding Flowers below. tiny with a 5-lobed green calyx and zero (female) or 3-8 (male) white with 5 linear sepals 2 secondary veins arising Petioles thin, 30-60% of blade length. Inflorescence small, petals, the stamens leaf axils. the petais. Fruit 3 mm long, green, egg-shaped except angled slightly, seed; there is a white about extending half beyond the fruit length; a persistent style protrudes at the tip. Each contains a single outer layer, a blackish seedshell, and whitish kernel. HABITAT: Dry, ореп, sunny sites; fields, roadsides, vacant lots, brushy areas, lightly used pastures, edges of parking lots, dry prairies-especially where disturbed. Native. FOOD USE: Gather leaves at any time during the growing season. Pour boiling water over fresh or dried leaves and steep for tea. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This is abundant in much of its range and does well in areas of heavy human use. It lines the expressways in the Dallas area, looking like miniature live-oak bonsai trees. The tea is easy to collect and pleasant to drink. 9 Blue flax 2 Linum perenne family Linaceae linear, stestle leaves lumped, and bright linee high, blue hairless 5-petated herb flowers. with thin ID stems and numerous small, leaning, DESCRIPTION: think with round, fibrous tough, Perennial rigid, with solid, many smooth, stems hairless, from a tough woody difficulty base. 2. Stems erect to on and often in the upper outer third- bark. -rarely They have between. ascending branches 18-24" (46-60 occasionally cm) tall and 2-6 mm 578 young stems, evenly distributed all the way up Leaves to the alternate, inflorescence, numerous, 0.4-1,4" very near (10-35 crowded the base mm) Occasional out- side mapped area 