0
1cm
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE
12 Thoroughwax
1
Bupleurum rotundifolium Apiaceae (Carrot family)
QUICK CHECK: Smooth, hairless plant with forking stems, broad perfoliate
un bels of tiny yellow flowers with whorls of ovate bracts. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Low annual herb to 2' (60 cm) tall. Stems 2-3 mm thick at the base,
rounded, smooth, hairless, solid, pale green (sometimes with reddish areas), Y forking
frequently by flowering, becoming very tough and wiry with age, Leaves perfoliate (the
stems grow through them), close together on young stems and near the base but widely
separated on branches. The blades are ovate (often broadly), 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, cupped,
Sparsely
rounded at the base and blunt-pointed with a nipple tip. The surface is smooth and hairless
distributed
on both sides. Margins are entire and light in color. Veins colorless (especially evident when held up to light)
The midvein is slightly depressed above and protruding below; all other veins are flat on ooth sides All major
veins radiate from the base, curving, not branching until near the margins. Inflorescence (summer) several
terminal, flat to slightly convex compound umbels. The first juncture, without bracts, nas 5-9 rays 10-14 mm
long. The second juncture is subtended by a whorl of 5-6 unequal, ovate, sharp-pointed, entire, bristle-tipped
bracts extending well beyond the flowers and overlapping with those of adjacent umbels. The 5-10 flowers of
each umbellet are tiny, nearly touching, yellow, on very short pedicels, with tiny petais almost indiscernible
HABITAT: Disturbed, dry, sunny ground, especially where sandy or gravelly. Locally common but overall
scarce, scattered, and unpredictable. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Young, tender leafy tips can be eaten raw or cooked in spring.
COMMENTS: The flavor is slightly aromatic and a tad bitter, but not unpleasant in moderation-it remindsime
of eryngo. However, it can be stunning as a garnish. The inflorescence unmistakably puts it in the carrot family
(Apiacieae) but the stems and leaves are quite unusual for that group. The name means "growing through
in reference to the perfoliate leaves. The genus name means "ox rib" in reference to the rib-like vein partern.
581
0 1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE 12 Thoroughwax 1 Bupleurum rotundifolium Apiaceae (Carrot family) QUICK CHECK: Smooth, hairless plant with forking stems, broad perfoliate un bels of tiny yellow flowers with whorls of ovate bracts. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Low annual herb to 2' (60 cm) tall. Stems 2-3 mm thick at the base, rounded, smooth, hairless, solid, pale green (sometimes with reddish areas), Y forking frequently by flowering, becoming very tough and wiry with age, Leaves perfoliate (the stems grow through them), close together on young stems and near the base but widely separated on branches. The blades are ovate (often broadly), 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, cupped, Sparsely rounded at the base and blunt-pointed with a nipple tip. The surface is smooth and hairless distributed on both sides. Margins are entire and light in color. Veins colorless (especially evident when held up to light) The midvein is slightly depressed above and protruding below; all other veins are flat on ooth sides All major veins radiate from the base, curving, not branching until near the margins. Inflorescence (summer) several terminal, flat to slightly convex compound umbels. The first juncture, without bracts, nas 5-9 rays 10-14 mm long. The second juncture is subtended by a whorl of 5-6 unequal, ovate, sharp-pointed, entire, bristle-tipped bracts extending well beyond the flowers and overlapping with those of adjacent umbels. The 5-10 flowers of each umbellet are tiny, nearly touching, yellow, on very short pedicels, with tiny petais almost indiscernible HABITAT: Disturbed, dry, sunny ground, especially where sandy or gravelly. Locally common but overall scarce, scattered, and unpredictable. Introduced. FOOD USE: Young, tender leafy tips can be eaten raw or cooked in spring. COMMENTS: The flavor is slightly aromatic and a tad bitter, but not unpleasant in moderation-it remindsime of eryngo. However, it can be stunning as a garnish. The inflorescence unmistakably puts it in the carrot family (Apiacieae) but the stems and leaves are quite unusual for that group. The name means "growing through in reference to the perfoliate leaves. The genus name means "ox rib" in reference to the rib-like vein partern. 581 