BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE ANDIENTIRE
11
Horseweed Conyza canadensis Asteraceae (Composite family)
CHECK Tall. columnar plant with long, narrow, white crowded flowerheads. leaves; the ID difficulty upper third 2.
QUICK small ascending branches hearing small Stems erect,
has numerous variable in size, much taller than wide. solid/pithy,
DESCRIPTION: Annual, extremely 0.7" (18 mm) thick, round in cross section, finely ridged,
2"--10' (5-300 cm) tall and uniform up to thickness in the lower 2/3, the surface with thick, inflated
striped anched light and and dark of nearly green, The thinly upper to densely third of covered the plant with has long, numerous erect hairs strongly or with ascending a short, winged branches, petiole, straight numer- and
bases and thin, wispy tips. flowerheads. Leaves alternate, sessile and sharp-tipped,
simple, scarcely tapering, bearing oblanceolate to narrowly elliptic, tapered at the base Midvein with
ous, crowded, ascending, lanceolate midvein or or hairless, wilting from the bottom up before Secondary flowering. veins few often
2-7" (5-18 cm) long, raised hairy double near ridge the in a gentle valley above, and a dull keel below. to the margin for half the leaf or length.
a flat to slightly to the midvein; the first pair from the base runs close raised on the upper surface.
not evident, 10-20° be almost discontinuous random assortment of veinlets scattered teeth-up to per
There may with appear to stiff an hairs, entire on upper leaves; lower leaves have a few branches. Inflorescence 4 the
Margins often sparse, have 1-2 tiny leaves in the axil, which may eventually erupt into panicle, with
side. Leaves third of the plant can be construed as a giant leafy panicle, or each branch as its own
entire heads in upper smaller sub-clusters. Heads 3-5 mm across, numerous but not crowded, cylindrical, not spreading open,
containing disk and ray florets. Thread-thin white rays scarcely surpass the narrow, green bracts. Seed com-
pressed, yellowish, and
shiny, attached to a white
to tan parachute
CONFUSING PLANTS:
Goldenrods have veins
depressed above.
HABITAT: Disturbed,
sunny, well-drained soil.
Crop fields, roadsides,
construction sites, and
clearcuts-especially those
sprayed with herbicide.
Native.
FOOD USE: The new leaves
and tender stem tips have
a unique, hot, spicy flavor.
This is a seasoning to be
used sparingly. Conserva-
tion 1.
COMMENTS: Dense,
nearly pure stands of horse-
weed after logging are a
good indicator of herbicide
use the plant has lately
been increasing greatly
in abundance. It has been
grown commercially as alla-
voring for at least one suft
drink taste it and see if you
canidentify which one. The
dried stems make excellent
spindles for frie hon fires
AKA Frigerom unadensis
you
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE ANDIENTIRE 11 Horseweed Conyza canadensis Asteraceae (Composite family) CHECK Tall. columnar plant with long, narrow, white crowded flowerheads. leaves; the ID difficulty upper third 2. QUICK small ascending branches hearing small Stems erect, has numerous variable in size, much taller than wide. solid/pithy, DESCRIPTION: Annual, extremely 0.7" (18 mm) thick, round in cross section, finely ridged, 2"--10' (5-300 cm) tall and uniform up to thickness in the lower 2/3, the surface with thick, inflated striped anched light and and dark of nearly green, The thinly upper to densely third of covered the plant with has long, numerous erect hairs strongly or with ascending a short, winged branches, petiole, straight numer- and bases and thin, wispy tips. flowerheads. Leaves alternate, sessile and sharp-tipped, simple, scarcely tapering, bearing oblanceolate to narrowly elliptic, tapered at the base Midvein with ous, crowded, ascending, lanceolate midvein or or hairless, wilting from the bottom up before Secondary flowering. veins few often 2-7" (5-18 cm) long, raised hairy double near ridge the in a gentle valley above, and a dull keel below. to the margin for half the leaf or length. a flat to slightly to the midvein; the first pair from the base runs close raised on the upper surface. not evident, 10-20° be almost discontinuous random assortment of veinlets scattered teeth-up to per There may with appear to stiff an hairs, entire on upper leaves; lower leaves have a few branches. Inflorescence 4 the Margins often sparse, have 1-2 tiny leaves in the axil, which may eventually erupt into panicle, with side. Leaves third of the plant can be construed as a giant leafy panicle, or each branch as its own entire heads in upper smaller sub-clusters. Heads 3-5 mm across, numerous but not crowded, cylindrical, not spreading open, containing disk and ray florets. Thread-thin white rays scarcely surpass the narrow, green bracts. Seed com- pressed, yellowish, and shiny, attached to a white to tan parachute CONFUSING PLANTS: Goldenrods have veins depressed above. HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny, well-drained soil. Crop fields, roadsides, construction sites, and clearcuts-especially those sprayed with herbicide. Native. FOOD USE: The new leaves and tender stem tips have a unique, hot, spicy flavor. This is a seasoning to be used sparingly. Conserva- tion 1. COMMENTS: Dense, nearly pure stands of horse- weed after logging are a good indicator of herbicide use the plant has lately been increasing greatly in abundance. It has been grown commercially as alla- voring for at least one suft drink taste it and see if you canidentify which one. The dried stems make excellent spindles for frie hon fires AKA Frigerom unadensis you 