BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES
13
Japanese knotweed japonica Polygonaceae 2 IWE-171 (Buckwheat family) broad
QUICK Reynoutria CHECK: Very large, arching herbs 1. with hollow, jointed stems and large, from a
DESCRIPTION: leaves. for ming thickets Large, arching, ID difficulty cane-like Stems perennial 6-10' (2-3m) herb growing long and in 0.8-1.6" dense between colonies (2-4 the cm) nodes, thick,
network of tough, dark, stout rhizomes. the nodes (which are darkened), each hollow petiole), hairless, often
Composite range
sistent with smooth arching. bloom. and with distinctly prominent. green many with jointed fine Leaves purplish acuminate grooves at alternate, spots (and tips, (may a hairless larger 4-10" be mostly groove (10-25 on top purple above cm) but sometimes long, in depressed. the ovate shoot faintly with stage). Petioles heart-shaped hairy LYDS 10-25% below, per-
of Japanese and
giant knotweeds.
with or truncated entire margins. bases and Midvein and secondary channeled; veins are lightly there is a thin, papery sheath where they the attach stem to tips, the
of blade length, as deep as wide and slightly off. Inflorescence dense, erect to ascending panicles flowers. at Pedicels
and stem, smaller but this panicles may disintegrate from leaf axils; and each fall widening panicle toward composed the flower. of many Flower smaller buds racemes 3-sided. of Flowers 3-10 (late summer) sheath.
tiny thin with and white, 4 white spreading petals. Fruit a 3-sided seed (achene) in a papery
CONFUSING PLANT: Chameleon plant Houttuynia cordata (also edible but tastes mottled, totally
different) has a solid and proportionately thinner stem that is reddish but not
the nodes lightened. The petioles are deeply channeled; leaves are more acuminate
and heart-shaped, and the young leaves are variegated. The plant is strongly scented.
HABITAT: An invasive escape from ornamental plantings that spreads to roadsides,
old fields, abandoned home sites, orchards, woodlots, and especially floodplains.
Likes full sun to partial shade on a wide range of soils, but not exceedingly wet or dry. I
FOOD USE: Gather tender shoots in spring before the leaves have formed and eat them
raw or cooked. They are sour with a flavor reminiscent of dock and rhubarb. They are
better after the skin has been peeled off, which you can do by hand or with a veggie peeler.
WARNING! Beware of herbicide. This plant is often sprayed for eradication.
COMMENTS: This plant is remarkably easy to identify and gather. AKA Fallopia
japonica, Polygonum cuspidatum.
Related edible:
Giant knotweed
Reynoutria sachalinensis
A larger plant with proportionately narrower
leaves up to 16" (40 cm) long, drooping with
heart-shaped bases, and secondary veins that more
walls more prominent and deeply depressed. The stem are
and are thinner. Both species are used similarly,
hybrids occur. I
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES 13 Japanese knotweed japonica Polygonaceae 2 IWE-171 (Buckwheat family) broad QUICK Reynoutria CHECK: Very large, arching herbs 1. with hollow, jointed stems and large, from a DESCRIPTION: leaves. for ming thickets Large, arching, ID difficulty cane-like Stems perennial 6-10' (2-3m) herb growing long and in 0.8-1.6" dense between colonies (2-4 the cm) nodes, thick, network of tough, dark, stout rhizomes. the nodes (which are darkened), each hollow petiole), hairless, often Composite range sistent with smooth arching. bloom. and with distinctly prominent. green many with jointed fine Leaves purplish acuminate grooves at alternate, spots (and tips, (may a hairless larger 4-10" be mostly groove (10-25 on top purple above cm) but sometimes long, in depressed. the ovate shoot faintly with stage). Petioles heart-shaped hairy LYDS 10-25% below, per- of Japanese and giant knotweeds. with or truncated entire margins. bases and Midvein and secondary channeled; veins are lightly there is a thin, papery sheath where they the attach stem to tips, the of blade length, as deep as wide and slightly off. Inflorescence dense, erect to ascending panicles flowers. at Pedicels and stem, smaller but this panicles may disintegrate from leaf axils; and each fall widening panicle toward composed the flower. of many Flower smaller buds racemes 3-sided. of Flowers 3-10 (late summer) sheath. tiny thin with and white, 4 white spreading petals. Fruit a 3-sided seed (achene) in a papery CONFUSING PLANT: Chameleon plant Houttuynia cordata (also edible but tastes mottled, totally different) has a solid and proportionately thinner stem that is reddish but not the nodes lightened. The petioles are deeply channeled; leaves are more acuminate and heart-shaped, and the young leaves are variegated. The plant is strongly scented. HABITAT: An invasive escape from ornamental plantings that spreads to roadsides, old fields, abandoned home sites, orchards, woodlots, and especially floodplains. Likes full sun to partial shade on a wide range of soils, but not exceedingly wet or dry. I FOOD USE: Gather tender shoots in spring before the leaves have formed and eat them raw or cooked. They are sour with a flavor reminiscent of dock and rhubarb. They are better after the skin has been peeled off, which you can do by hand or with a veggie peeler. WARNING! Beware of herbicide. This plant is often sprayed for eradication. COMMENTS: This plant is remarkably easy to identify and gather. AKA Fallopia japonica, Polygonum cuspidatum. Related edible: Giant knotweed Reynoutria sachalinensis A larger plant with proportionately narrower leaves up to 16" (40 cm) long, drooping with heart-shaped bases, and secondary veins that more walls more prominent and deeply depressed. The stem are and are thinner. Both species are used similarly, hybrids occur. I 