BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE
14 SMARTWEED
genus Persicaria Polygonaceae (Buckwheat family)
QUICK narrow and GROUP ID: Zigzag stems with a papery sheath above
entire; tiny white to pink flowers in small spike-like ear clusters enlarged ID nada. difficulty leaves 1.
DESCRIPTION: faintly ribbed Annual or perennial herbs, erect to lax. Stems round, smooth
(2 cm) but not angled, bulged at the nodes, zigzag, 1-7 (30-210 long, or sometimes
stem thick, usually branched. Sheath (these may wither with age) wrapped around up to 0 8
above each node, thin and papery, the base fused to the petiole, split down the
the end unlobed but often with protruding bristles at the apex. Leaves alternate, one mostly side,
sessile or on short petioles, 1-9" (2.5-23 cm) long, entire, lanceolate to elliptic or ovate,
Composite
the tips pointed. The leaves of several species may have a large dark zone (thumbprint)
range of smart
in the center. Petioles D-shaped, not channeled, flaring gradually into the blade. Mid-
weeds The 4
veins prominent, offset by light color, raised at the bottom of a gentle valley. Secondary
species shown
veins numerous, prominent, and usually lightly depressed, 45-80° to the midvein. Inflo-
are each widely
distributed
rescence terminal on all species, also axillary on some; a spike or spike-like raceme, erect
through most
or drooping and often resembling a catkin, bearing numerous small flowers in mini-clusters,
of this range.
the pedicels very short, neither the raceme or any individual flowers subtended by leafy bracts.
Flowers tiny, about 3 mm across, white or greenish or pink to red, often multiple colors on the same spike.
with 4-5 hairless tepals that scarcely open on most species. After blooming the sepals close around the single
developing seed (achene). Seeds dark, 2-3 mm long, broadly oval with a nipple-point, often slightly flattened
FOOD USE: Tender young leaves and stem tips can be used raw but are better cooked. The flowering spikes
make a fun but not delicious nibble. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: In older classifications this group is part of the genus Polygonum, but today most botanists
split the smartweeds into their own genus. All smartweeds are safe to eat as tender young greens-although
some are hot and others more or less astringent. The name "smartweed" comes from the pain caused by the
peppery components of some species after you touch them and then touch sensitive areas such as your eyes
or lips. Highlighted below are a few of the best and most common species.
Dock-leaved smartweed Persicaria lapathifolia
2
Annual 2-7' (60-210 cm) tall with stems up to 0.8" cm) thick, usually erect and spreading with major branches.
Leaves large, narrowly lanceolate, 3-9" (8-23 cm) long, the blades smooth and usually hairless below; above
they have sparse, stiff, leaning hairs mostly near the margin. When young the leaves usually have a large dark out
spot in the center, but this is often absent at flowering. Sheath has prominent, raised, darkened veins.
no extending bristles. Inflorescence 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, arching or drooping. Flowers tiny, white, greenish or
pinkish, the tepals not spreading and scarcely distinguishable. (Continued on the next page.)
(left) Young leaves of dock-leaved smartweed (middle and right) The Howers can also be pink
583
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE 14 SMARTWEED genus Persicaria Polygonaceae (Buckwheat family) QUICK narrow and GROUP ID: Zigzag stems with a papery sheath above entire; tiny white to pink flowers in small spike-like ear clusters enlarged ID nada. difficulty leaves 1. DESCRIPTION: faintly ribbed Annual or perennial herbs, erect to lax. Stems round, smooth (2 cm) but not angled, bulged at the nodes, zigzag, 1-7 (30-210 long, or sometimes stem thick, usually branched. Sheath (these may wither with age) wrapped around up to 0 8 above each node, thin and papery, the base fused to the petiole, split down the the end unlobed but often with protruding bristles at the apex. Leaves alternate, one mostly side, sessile or on short petioles, 1-9" (2.5-23 cm) long, entire, lanceolate to elliptic or ovate, Composite the tips pointed. The leaves of several species may have a large dark zone (thumbprint) range of smart in the center. Petioles D-shaped, not channeled, flaring gradually into the blade. Mid- weeds The 4 veins prominent, offset by light color, raised at the bottom of a gentle valley. Secondary species shown veins numerous, prominent, and usually lightly depressed, 45-80° to the midvein. Inflo- are each widely distributed rescence terminal on all species, also axillary on some; a spike or spike-like raceme, erect through most or drooping and often resembling a catkin, bearing numerous small flowers in mini-clusters, of this range. the pedicels very short, neither the raceme or any individual flowers subtended by leafy bracts. Flowers tiny, about 3 mm across, white or greenish or pink to red, often multiple colors on the same spike. with 4-5 hairless tepals that scarcely open on most species. After blooming the sepals close around the single developing seed (achene). Seeds dark, 2-3 mm long, broadly oval with a nipple-point, often slightly flattened FOOD USE: Tender young leaves and stem tips can be used raw but are better cooked. The flowering spikes make a fun but not delicious nibble. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: In older classifications this group is part of the genus Polygonum, but today most botanists split the smartweeds into their own genus. All smartweeds are safe to eat as tender young greens-although some are hot and others more or less astringent. The name "smartweed" comes from the pain caused by the peppery components of some species after you touch them and then touch sensitive areas such as your eyes or lips. Highlighted below are a few of the best and most common species. Dock-leaved smartweed Persicaria lapathifolia 2 Annual 2-7' (60-210 cm) tall with stems up to 0.8" cm) thick, usually erect and spreading with major branches. Leaves large, narrowly lanceolate, 3-9" (8-23 cm) long, the blades smooth and usually hairless below; above they have sparse, stiff, leaning hairs mostly near the margin. When young the leaves usually have a large dark out spot in the center, but this is often absent at flowering. Sheath has prominent, raised, darkened veins. no extending bristles. Inflorescence 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, arching or drooping. Flowers tiny, white, greenish or pinkish, the tepals not spreading and scarcely distinguishable. (Continued on the next page.) (left) Young leaves of dock-leaved smartweed (middle and right) The Howers can also be pink 583 