BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE
weedy dried-up woodlots, puddles, construction marshes (especially sites, and on gardens muskrat Probably lodges), native. also upland sites such as bargyards. back /ards
FOOD does not USE: linger The like leaves can be used as a hot seasoning; the effect is potent but
Persicario
macuios:
chopped fine. Most capsaicin, of the heat They is lost are by best drying when or canning, young and Conservation tender; if gathered 1. delayed when tough several they seconds. should and be
COMMENTS: are in East This plant is very hot, and should be used in moderation. Cultivated varieties with
touched grown their Asia. This is the species for which the name "smartweed" was given; milder flavor
for this hotness is warburganal. AKA water pepper.
lips or eyes after pulling this out can attest to its potency. The chemical any primarily gardeners responsible who have
RELATED EDIBLES: The only other hot species I have identified in this genus is Persicaria punctata, a native
which is very similar to the above species but has broader, flatter leaves and flowers that are usually not tinged
pink; magnification reveals the seed (achene) to be smooth and glossier than that of P. hydropiper. The false
water pepper P. hydropiperoides is not hot.
Water smartweed
Persicaria amphibia & P. coccinea
1
Two similar species share this common name; both of them spread by rhizome to form loose colonies on land or
in the water. The form is variable in both species due to growing conditions-there are floating-leaved aquatic
stems as well as erect terrestrial stems. The latter tend to have large leaves. Water smartweeds have showy
red flowers densely packed into erect, usually solitary clusters 0.6-3.5" (1.5-9 cm) long.
HABITAT: Sunny or partially sunny shallow water, wetlands, and dry land near water, especially where the
water level fluctuates dramatically. Most common along large rivers, pothole ponds, and marshes with no
outlet. Native.
FOOD USE: The shoots and young leaves, especially those that are
still scrolled, can be eaten raw or cooked as a potherb. With age they
quickly become tough and very astringent. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This adaptable plant spreads great distances by rhi-
zomes, and can survive fluctuating water levels by living in standing
water or on dry ground. P. coccinea produces semi-woody tubers
that don't taste bad if you have an extra set of teeth and a few hours
for chewing.
Water
smartweed
shoot (left)
and flower
(right).
Papper STATES
585
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE weedy dried-up woodlots, puddles, construction marshes (especially sites, and on gardens muskrat Probably lodges), native. also upland sites such as bargyards. back /ards FOOD does not USE: linger The like leaves can be used as a hot seasoning; the effect is potent but Persicario macuios: chopped fine. Most capsaicin, of the heat They is lost are by best drying when or canning, young and Conservation tender; if gathered 1. delayed when tough several they seconds. should and be COMMENTS: are in East This plant is very hot, and should be used in moderation. Cultivated varieties with touched grown their Asia. This is the species for which the name "smartweed" was given; milder flavor for this hotness is warburganal. AKA water pepper. lips or eyes after pulling this out can attest to its potency. The chemical any primarily gardeners responsible who have RELATED EDIBLES: The only other hot species I have identified in this genus is Persicaria punctata, a native which is very similar to the above species but has broader, flatter leaves and flowers that are usually not tinged pink; magnification reveals the seed (achene) to be smooth and glossier than that of P. hydropiper. The false water pepper P. hydropiperoides is not hot. Water smartweed Persicaria amphibia & P. coccinea 1 Two similar species share this common name; both of them spread by rhizome to form loose colonies on land or in the water. The form is variable in both species due to growing conditions-there are floating-leaved aquatic stems as well as erect terrestrial stems. The latter tend to have large leaves. Water smartweeds have showy red flowers densely packed into erect, usually solitary clusters 0.6-3.5" (1.5-9 cm) long. HABITAT: Sunny or partially sunny shallow water, wetlands, and dry land near water, especially where the water level fluctuates dramatically. Most common along large rivers, pothole ponds, and marshes with no outlet. Native. FOOD USE: The shoots and young leaves, especially those that are still scrolled, can be eaten raw or cooked as a potherb. With age they quickly become tough and very astringent. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This adaptable plant spreads great distances by rhi- zomes, and can survive fluctuating water levels by living in standing water or on dry ground. P. coccinea produces semi-woody tubers that don't taste bad if you have an extra set of teeth and a few hours for chewing. Water smartweed shoot (left) and flower (right). Papper STATES 585 