BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES/ALTERNATE AND ENNIRE
Dock-leaved smartweed (continued)
HABITAT: Disturbed, rich. moist soil in full to partial sun. Disturbed woods, barnyards and fields, floodplains,
roadsides, beaver lodges and dams. Native.
pond margins, smartweeds. I think it has a good flavor and texture, lack although of bristles older
COMMENTS: leaves get astringent. This is the This largest species of can our be separated from P. maculosa when young by the on
its leaf sheath.
Lady's Thumb
Persicaria maculosa
2
annual to 3.5' (1m) tall, sometimes sprawling or semi-erect and rooting at Sheath the nodes. has Leaves 1-6" of
Medium-sized (2.5-15 cm) long, narrowly lanceolate, usually with a dark "thumbprint" in the center. a fringe
short bristles. Flowers white to pink, in short, dense, erect spikes to 2" (5 cm) long.
HABITAT: Disturbed, moist, rich soil in full sun to moderate shade. Grows in weedy situations such as yards,
gardens, crop fields, vacant lots, disturbed woods, riverbanks, dried up puddles, washouts.
COMMENTS: This common weed makes a good vegetable and is often abundant in urban and agricultural
landscapes.
(left) Mature lady's thumb. (above) Young greens of lady's thumb.
Pepper smartweed
Persicaria hydropiper
Lower Annual, branches leaning to spreading or weakly erect, the stems to 30"
the stem by a are spreading; upper branches are sometimes (75 cm) long.
long, on petioles sheath, only diverging after the first node. Leaves appressed to
before flowering, 3-5% of blade length, lanceolate, often 2-5" (5-13 cm)
the upper margin. lacking The zigzag the dark thumbprint. The sheath wavy, has bristles especially on
self-fertilize. leat Seed together up corolla to axil single, 7" does (18 enclosed toward cm) not shiny, There long, spread. the by enclosed are branch a with sometimes sheath-these There well-spaced in tips. is inflorescence a often Flowers tiny one flowers flower flowers or white, a branches clusters few never at each often flowers open near often node, with in and the a droop a getting smaller pink presumably and tip; closer upp the are or
pas (hard to see without magnification). green calyx that is dotted with numerous plant's base tiny
HABITAT: sions III floodplain Sunny to partly shaded, rich, moist,
woods, pond or lake margins, disturbed beaver soil: dams mucky and depres lodges,
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES/ALTERNATE AND ENNIRE Dock-leaved smartweed (continued) HABITAT: Disturbed, rich. moist soil in full to partial sun. Disturbed woods, barnyards and fields, floodplains, roadsides, beaver lodges and dams. Native. pond margins, smartweeds. I think it has a good flavor and texture, lack although of bristles older COMMENTS: leaves get astringent. This is the This largest species of can our be separated from P. maculosa when young by the on its leaf sheath. Lady's Thumb Persicaria maculosa 2 annual to 3.5' (1m) tall, sometimes sprawling or semi-erect and rooting at Sheath the nodes. has Leaves 1-6" of Medium-sized (2.5-15 cm) long, narrowly lanceolate, usually with a dark "thumbprint" in the center. a fringe short bristles. Flowers white to pink, in short, dense, erect spikes to 2" (5 cm) long. HABITAT: Disturbed, moist, rich soil in full sun to moderate shade. Grows in weedy situations such as yards, gardens, crop fields, vacant lots, disturbed woods, riverbanks, dried up puddles, washouts. COMMENTS: This common weed makes a good vegetable and is often abundant in urban and agricultural landscapes. (left) Mature lady's thumb. (above) Young greens of lady's thumb. Pepper smartweed Persicaria hydropiper Lower Annual, branches leaning to spreading or weakly erect, the stems to 30" the stem by a are spreading; upper branches are sometimes (75 cm) long. long, on petioles sheath, only diverging after the first node. Leaves appressed to before flowering, 3-5% of blade length, lanceolate, often 2-5" (5-13 cm) the upper margin. lacking The zigzag the dark thumbprint. The sheath wavy, has bristles especially on self-fertilize. leat Seed together up corolla to axil single, 7" does (18 enclosed toward cm) not shiny, There long, spread. the by enclosed are branch a with sometimes sheath-these There well-spaced in tips. is inflorescence a often Flowers tiny one flowers flower flowers or white, a branches clusters few never at each often flowers open near often node, with in and the a droop a getting smaller pink presumably and tip; closer upp the are or pas (hard to see without magnification). green calyx that is dotted with numerous plant's base tiny HABITAT: sions III floodplain Sunny to partly shaded, rich, moist, woods, pond or lake margins, disturbed beaver soil: dams mucky and depres lodges, 