BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE
16 Willow-leaved dock
1
2
Rumex triangulivalvis Polygonaceae (Buckwheat NG-226 family)
QUICK some of CHECK: them Multiple leaning stems with long, narrow, entire,
over a foot long; unshowy flowers and dry triangular glossy, fruits. hairless ID difficulty leaves
DESCRIPTION: Stems clumped, Perennial herb from a taproot, the greenery dying back 1.
round but for weakly erect, leaning, or spreading, to 5' (1.5 m) tall and in late summer
green (with darker one shallow trough in each internode, the surface smooth, 13 thick, solid.
Leaves green lines, especially above), almost fully covered with hairless, light
young. to linear, often alternate, few. borne mostly on the lower stem, to 14 (36 cm) sheaths long, when
on the slightly creased. acute at the base and long-tapered to the tip. There entire, are narrowly lanceolate
Midvein upper has stem. a The surface is smooth, glossy, hairless, flat to slightly wavy (but not crisped many like reduced leaves
track distinct track made up of 2 thin, raised, parallel, light green lines down the curly dock).
at on each edge. Secondary veins flat to faintly raised above and often faintly depressed center. below. plus a similar
to 60-70° angles but arching forward to meet the next vein before reaching the margin. Petioles numerous. thick
shallowly wing-channeled above with a thin groove in the center, rounded below, solid, 20-50% of blade flat
length. Inflorescence dense conical clusters 3-9' (8-23 cm) long at the branch tip; the top half has many
such clusters. Flowers (spring) tiny, green-
ish, and unshowy. Seeds brown, 2-3 mm
long, 3-sided, the edges sharp, enclosed by
3 triangular leafy structures 5-6 long
with heart-shaped bases, each with a large
kidney-shaped thingamajigger (tubercie)
in the center.
HABITAT: Disturbed soil in full sun,
especially where sandy and rich. Likes
well-drained but periodically moist sites.
Roadsides, steep slopes. field edges, vacant
lots. river banks, ditches. Native.
FOOD USE: The young leaves, stems,
and petioles can be eaten raw or cooked
in spring or early summer, as long as they
remain tender. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This good-tasting dock is
unusual in not having a basal rosette; you
might fail to notice this at a glance. In much
of our area it is the only weedy dock that IS
native. AKA Rumex mexicanus.
Poke
3
3
IWE-266
Phytolacca americana family Phytolaccaceae
QUICK CHECK: Thick. tapered. hairless, clumped shoots with entire. elliptic, alternate
leaves; very large branchy herb with drooping racemes of squat purple berries in late
summer. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a fleshy taproot that may be very thick. Stems 3-10
(1-3 m) tall, in clumps of up to 40. hairless, smooth, glaucous. round solid at first becom-
ing pithy, up to 2" (5 cm) thick red to purple at maturity but light green when young. erect to chambered leaning. with and
ascending branches in the upper half. LYDS prominent light straw-colored the pith hairless
prominent breaking into discs Leaves 3-12" (8-30 cm) long, alternate anceplate to narrowly where ovate, there
sometimes sometimes wavy-edged acute at the base and tip the tips blunt with a tiny indent to dropping is a
downturned entire, tooth about 2 mmlong New leaves are slightly ascending. but older next ones page.) are descending
Midvein slightly depressed above and protruding below (Continued or the
587
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE 16 Willow-leaved dock 1 2 Rumex triangulivalvis Polygonaceae (Buckwheat NG-226 family) QUICK some of CHECK: them Multiple leaning stems with long, narrow, entire, over a foot long; unshowy flowers and dry triangular glossy, fruits. hairless ID difficulty leaves DESCRIPTION: Stems clumped, Perennial herb from a taproot, the greenery dying back 1. round but for weakly erect, leaning, or spreading, to 5' (1.5 m) tall and in late summer green (with darker one shallow trough in each internode, the surface smooth, 13 thick, solid. Leaves green lines, especially above), almost fully covered with hairless, light young. to linear, often alternate, few. borne mostly on the lower stem, to 14 (36 cm) sheaths long, when on the slightly creased. acute at the base and long-tapered to the tip. There entire, are narrowly lanceolate Midvein upper has stem. a The surface is smooth, glossy, hairless, flat to slightly wavy (but not crisped many like reduced leaves track distinct track made up of 2 thin, raised, parallel, light green lines down the curly dock). at on each edge. Secondary veins flat to faintly raised above and often faintly depressed center. below. plus a similar to 60-70° angles but arching forward to meet the next vein before reaching the margin. Petioles numerous. thick shallowly wing-channeled above with a thin groove in the center, rounded below, solid, 20-50% of blade flat length. Inflorescence dense conical clusters 3-9' (8-23 cm) long at the branch tip; the top half has many such clusters. Flowers (spring) tiny, green- ish, and unshowy. Seeds brown, 2-3 mm long, 3-sided, the edges sharp, enclosed by 3 triangular leafy structures 5-6 long with heart-shaped bases, each with a large kidney-shaped thingamajigger (tubercie) in the center. HABITAT: Disturbed soil in full sun, especially where sandy and rich. Likes well-drained but periodically moist sites. Roadsides, steep slopes. field edges, vacant lots. river banks, ditches. Native. FOOD USE: The young leaves, stems, and petioles can be eaten raw or cooked in spring or early summer, as long as they remain tender. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This good-tasting dock is unusual in not having a basal rosette; you might fail to notice this at a glance. In much of our area it is the only weedy dock that IS native. AKA Rumex mexicanus. Poke 3 3 IWE-266 Phytolacca americana family Phytolaccaceae QUICK CHECK: Thick. tapered. hairless, clumped shoots with entire. elliptic, alternate leaves; very large branchy herb with drooping racemes of squat purple berries in late summer. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a fleshy taproot that may be very thick. Stems 3-10 (1-3 m) tall, in clumps of up to 40. hairless, smooth, glaucous. round solid at first becom- ing pithy, up to 2" (5 cm) thick red to purple at maturity but light green when young. erect to chambered leaning. with and ascending branches in the upper half. LYDS prominent light straw-colored the pith hairless prominent breaking into discs Leaves 3-12" (8-30 cm) long, alternate anceplate to narrowly where ovate, there sometimes sometimes wavy-edged acute at the base and tip the tips blunt with a tiny indent to dropping is a downturned entire, tooth about 2 mmlong New leaves are slightly ascending. but older next ones page.) are descending Midvein slightly depressed above and protruding below (Continued or the 587 