BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES
Erect knotweed
1
2
15
Polygonaceae
(Buckwheat
family)
erectum
Polygonum high with entire, elliptic leaves of very different difficulty sizes; 2.
QUI N jointed, NECK: green. all to zigzag knee stems and tiny flowers in the leaf axils. ID
tongh Annual herb 9-28" (23-71 tall. erect to erratically leaning unharmed or spreading. after
DESCRIPTION: and tough but not brittle, specially adapted to spring back up and bulged
Stems flexible roundish, to 5 mm thick, zigzag, bright green, finely striated, jointed nodes are small,
at the closely spaced and cut into sharp-pointed sections. Branches at 45-70° angles, may prominent thin, and wide
trampling, nodes, strongly tapered between them. Sheaths at be
brown, papery, in light competition, absent or few (but often long) where crowded. Leaves often alternate, blunt; the entire, leaves
flat. spreading elliptic, tapered to the base, nearly sessile, the tips acute and usually pointed but
are extremely variable in size, 0.3-2,2" (8-56 mm) long-those on branches much smaller than those borne on the
main stem. Veins flat above, slightly protruding below; the secondary veins are 45° to the midvein. Flowers tiny,
in small groups on short, thread-like pedicels from leaf axils, greenish and white with 5 spreading, triangular
tepals. After pollination the tepals close over the fruit, which is a single, dry, triangular, brown seed (achene).
HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in full sun to semi-shade, in areas where taller plants are trampled but not mowed
or herbicided. Mostly openings in river floodplains, forest edges, boat landing areas, bridges, trails, road
edges, margins of dirt parking areas, poorly maintained parks, barnyards. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender young leaves are marginally edible, like those of other knotweeds. Ripe seeds (late autumn)
can be winnowed, cracked, and cooked like buckwheat, to which it is related. Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: We don't really know the distribution of this plant because it has been so often misidentified by
botanists, and because a similar species, P. achoreum, has sometimes been lumped with it. Prehistorically erect
knotweed was grown as a seed crop in the lower Midwest and upper South; it was domesticated thousands
of years ago, but those
strains are now extinct.
Once fairly common as
a weed, this species has
declined drastically over
the last 70 years, prob-
ably due to the advent
of .riding lawnmow-
ers, weedwackers, and
herbicide. It thrived in
areas moderately trod-
den by horses, but most
such areas are mowed
or sprayed now. Don't
gather unless abundant;
curate the conditions to
maintain a colony.
family
Phytolo
586
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES Erect knotweed 1 2 15 Polygonaceae (Buckwheat family) erectum Polygonum high with entire, elliptic leaves of very different difficulty sizes; 2. QUI N jointed, NECK: green. all to zigzag knee stems and tiny flowers in the leaf axils. ID tongh Annual herb 9-28" (23-71 tall. erect to erratically leaning unharmed or spreading. after DESCRIPTION: and tough but not brittle, specially adapted to spring back up and bulged Stems flexible roundish, to 5 mm thick, zigzag, bright green, finely striated, jointed nodes are small, at the closely spaced and cut into sharp-pointed sections. Branches at 45-70° angles, may prominent thin, and wide trampling, nodes, strongly tapered between them. Sheaths at be brown, papery, in light competition, absent or few (but often long) where crowded. Leaves often alternate, blunt; the entire, leaves flat. spreading elliptic, tapered to the base, nearly sessile, the tips acute and usually pointed but are extremely variable in size, 0.3-2,2" (8-56 mm) long-those on branches much smaller than those borne on the main stem. Veins flat above, slightly protruding below; the secondary veins are 45° to the midvein. Flowers tiny, in small groups on short, thread-like pedicels from leaf axils, greenish and white with 5 spreading, triangular tepals. After pollination the tepals close over the fruit, which is a single, dry, triangular, brown seed (achene). HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in full sun to semi-shade, in areas where taller plants are trampled but not mowed or herbicided. Mostly openings in river floodplains, forest edges, boat landing areas, bridges, trails, road edges, margins of dirt parking areas, poorly maintained parks, barnyards. Native. FOOD USE: Tender young leaves are marginally edible, like those of other knotweeds. Ripe seeds (late autumn) can be winnowed, cracked, and cooked like buckwheat, to which it is related. Conservation 3. COMMENTS: We don't really know the distribution of this plant because it has been so often misidentified by botanists, and because a similar species, P. achoreum, has sometimes been lumped with it. Prehistorically erect knotweed was grown as a seed crop in the lower Midwest and upper South; it was domesticated thousands of years ago, but those strains are now extinct. Once fairly common as a weed, this species has declined drastically over the last 70 years, prob- ably due to the advent of .riding lawnmow- ers, weedwackers, and herbicide. It thrived in areas moderately trod- den by horses, but most such areas are mowed or sprayed now. Don't gather unless abundant; curate the conditions to maintain a colony. family Phytolo 586 