BASAL LEAVES ABSENT,
17 Poke (continued)
veins broadly angled, slightly depressed above. dividing before reaching leaf the base. margins. From each Petioles node 8-15% there
Secondary broadly channeled, the edges with a wing tapering from the to the next node below.
of blade length, wing-ridges, often purple tinted, running down the otherwise smooth stem crinkled, the
Shoots are two faint strongly and have skin that peels in thin, translucent strips. New leaves are upper ones
pointing taper vertically. Inflorescence (summer into fall) a raceme 5-14" (13-36 cm) long, descending to drooping,
usually curving, with 40-90 flowers on pedicels 5-12 mm long. Flowers white to light pinkish, 5 mm across,
with 5 sepais (looking like petals), these broadly elliptic and spreading to reflexed, cupped with incurved tips.
Fruit (late summer to fall) a purple-black berry containing several dark seeds, broader than long and flattened
like a doughnut, 9-10 mm across, with usually 11 radiating sections (evident when the fruit is green), each section
with a tiny protruding "whisker" at the tip. They are borne almost touching one another on a drooping raceme.
HABITAT: Young or open disturbed woods, logged areas, forest edges, fields, pastures, roadsides, fencerows,
floodplain forests. Especially likes sandy soil. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather young shoots and their leaves in spring while still tender and meristematic. Leaves should
be small, ruffled, clustered, and erect; stems should be robust, not fibrous, and green. Before eating, shoots
and greens must be boiled in two changes of water for 10 minutes each. Conservation 1.
WARNING! Poke should not be eaten raw! Raw poke is toxic and will make you severely ill. Only young,
tender, meristematic greens can be eaten.
COMMENTS: In much of our region this is our most commonly eaten
and best-known wild vegetable. The stems are large, succulent, mild
in flavor, easily collected, and prolific-but they must be young and
meristematic. The berries are sometimes used in small amounts
medicinally but I recommend against eating them. Although I have
heard second-hand reports of them being used for pie, jelly, or juice,
the absence of first-hand accounts despite extensive interviews is
suspicious, and the taste of the berries is not good.
The ideal stage for harvest.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, 17 Poke (continued) veins broadly angled, slightly depressed above. dividing before reaching leaf the base. margins. From each Petioles node 8-15% there Secondary broadly channeled, the edges with a wing tapering from the to the next node below. of blade length, wing-ridges, often purple tinted, running down the otherwise smooth stem crinkled, the Shoots are two faint strongly and have skin that peels in thin, translucent strips. New leaves are upper ones pointing taper vertically. Inflorescence (summer into fall) a raceme 5-14" (13-36 cm) long, descending to drooping, usually curving, with 40-90 flowers on pedicels 5-12 mm long. Flowers white to light pinkish, 5 mm across, with 5 sepais (looking like petals), these broadly elliptic and spreading to reflexed, cupped with incurved tips. Fruit (late summer to fall) a purple-black berry containing several dark seeds, broader than long and flattened like a doughnut, 9-10 mm across, with usually 11 radiating sections (evident when the fruit is green), each section with a tiny protruding "whisker" at the tip. They are borne almost touching one another on a drooping raceme. HABITAT: Young or open disturbed woods, logged areas, forest edges, fields, pastures, roadsides, fencerows, floodplain forests. Especially likes sandy soil. Native. FOOD USE: Gather young shoots and their leaves in spring while still tender and meristematic. Leaves should be small, ruffled, clustered, and erect; stems should be robust, not fibrous, and green. Before eating, shoots and greens must be boiled in two changes of water for 10 minutes each. Conservation 1. WARNING! Poke should not be eaten raw! Raw poke is toxic and will make you severely ill. Only young, tender, meristematic greens can be eaten. COMMENTS: In much of our region this is our most commonly eaten and best-known wild vegetable. The stems are large, succulent, mild in flavor, easily collected, and prolific-but they must be young and meristematic. The berries are sometimes used in small amounts medicinally but I recommend against eating them. Although I have heard second-hand reports of them being used for pie, jelly, or juice, the absence of first-hand accounts despite extensive interviews is suspicious, and the taste of the berries is not good. The ideal stage for harvest. 