BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE
informations
18 Fireweed
1
pith
2
Epilobium
angustifolium
family
Onagraceae
QUICK nearly CHECK: Tall, straight colonial plant with thin, unbranched
sessile, linear leaves and 4-part pink-purple flowers in a raceme. stems. ID difficulty numerous 1.
DESCRIPTION: (1.2-2.7 Perennial forming colonies by rhizome. Stems erect, not
less m) tall and 5-13 mm thick, mostly unbranched, proportionately thin, clumped, 4-9
or slightly woolly, the surface with faint bloom and gentle ridges (more straight, prominent hair
toward the top) running down from each node, the bark stringy. The inside is solid
flesh with a whitish center, slimy and soft. Shoots tapered, light green, sometimes green with a faint purplish cast.
88833
vertically lined. Lowest shoot leaves tiny with prominent midveins protruding below, the margins with a few
tiny, scattered, darkened bumps. Leaves alternate, crowded, narrow-lanceolate, tapered to the base, long-
pointed, 2-7" (5-18 cm) long, pale and hairless below, hairless or nearly so above. There are tiny leaf clusters in
each axil. Midvein very prominent and light-colored (sometimes purplish)-depressed and sometimes faintly
hairy above, projecting and rounded below. Secondary veins slightly depressed above and protruding below.
75-80°, looping forward and linking just before hitting the margin. Margins curled downward, entire or with
a few tiny, scattered tooth-like bumps. Petiole 1-3% of blade length. Inflorescence a raceme to 18' (46 cm)
long, the lower part with flowers in the axils of leaves gradually decreasing in size, the pedicels 4-9 mm. Flow-
ers (mid to late summer) very showy, a long purple tube flaring into 4 linear sepals behind 4 lighter pink-purple
petals, broad-tipped and narrowed to a stalked base, asymmetrical as if a petal is missing. The filaments and
style are drooping and white, the stigma 4-lobed. After blooming in late summer, the reddish stems of the
inflorescence give the whole colony a purplish haze. Fruit a thin, almost needle-like capsule 1-2.5" (2.5-6.5 cm)
long, ascending at maturity, with fine hairs, splitting open to release numerous seeds with silky parachutes.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Goldenrods have rough or fuzzy leaves with less prominent midveins, and secondary
veins at sharper angles. Horseweed is conspicuously hairy.
HABITAT: Sunny, disturbed sites in forested regions; along trails and roads, riverbanks, clearings, landslides.
forest edges. Often abundant after clearcutting or forest fires. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather young shoots while still tender, from 6-14" (15-36 cm) tall. Remove leafy tips and dis-
card, then boil shoots
to remove bitterness
Dried leaves make a
good tea; properly fer-
mented leaves make an
excellent tea. Pith from
young stalks can be bro-
ken out and eaten raw or
cooked Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: Although
often mentioned in the
wild food literature,
the shoots of this plant
are not much liked as a
vegetable, as the leaves
and skin are astringent.
AKA
hamaenerion
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE informations 18 Fireweed 1 pith 2 Epilobium angustifolium family Onagraceae QUICK nearly CHECK: Tall, straight colonial plant with thin, unbranched sessile, linear leaves and 4-part pink-purple flowers in a raceme. stems. ID difficulty numerous 1. DESCRIPTION: (1.2-2.7 Perennial forming colonies by rhizome. Stems erect, not less m) tall and 5-13 mm thick, mostly unbranched, proportionately thin, clumped, 4-9 or slightly woolly, the surface with faint bloom and gentle ridges (more straight, prominent hair toward the top) running down from each node, the bark stringy. The inside is solid flesh with a whitish center, slimy and soft. Shoots tapered, light green, sometimes green with a faint purplish cast. 88833 vertically lined. Lowest shoot leaves tiny with prominent midveins protruding below, the margins with a few tiny, scattered, darkened bumps. Leaves alternate, crowded, narrow-lanceolate, tapered to the base, long- pointed, 2-7" (5-18 cm) long, pale and hairless below, hairless or nearly so above. There are tiny leaf clusters in each axil. Midvein very prominent and light-colored (sometimes purplish)-depressed and sometimes faintly hairy above, projecting and rounded below. Secondary veins slightly depressed above and protruding below. 75-80°, looping forward and linking just before hitting the margin. Margins curled downward, entire or with a few tiny, scattered tooth-like bumps. Petiole 1-3% of blade length. Inflorescence a raceme to 18' (46 cm) long, the lower part with flowers in the axils of leaves gradually decreasing in size, the pedicels 4-9 mm. Flow- ers (mid to late summer) very showy, a long purple tube flaring into 4 linear sepals behind 4 lighter pink-purple petals, broad-tipped and narrowed to a stalked base, asymmetrical as if a petal is missing. The filaments and style are drooping and white, the stigma 4-lobed. After blooming in late summer, the reddish stems of the inflorescence give the whole colony a purplish haze. Fruit a thin, almost needle-like capsule 1-2.5" (2.5-6.5 cm) long, ascending at maturity, with fine hairs, splitting open to release numerous seeds with silky parachutes. CONFUSING PLANTS: Goldenrods have rough or fuzzy leaves with less prominent midveins, and secondary veins at sharper angles. Horseweed is conspicuously hairy. HABITAT: Sunny, disturbed sites in forested regions; along trails and roads, riverbanks, clearings, landslides. forest edges. Often abundant after clearcutting or forest fires. Native. FOOD USE: Gather young shoots while still tender, from 6-14" (15-36 cm) tall. Remove leafy tips and dis- card, then boil shoots to remove bitterness Dried leaves make a good tea; properly fer- mented leaves make an excellent tea. Pith from young stalks can be bro- ken out and eaten raw or cooked Conservation 2. COMMENTS: Although often mentioned in the wild food literature, the shoots of this plant are not much liked as a vegetable, as the leaves and skin are astringent. AKA hamaenerion 