BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES
19 American pellitory
2
(Nettle
family)
Parietaria pensylvanica
Urticaceae
CHECK: Small, light green, erect herb with thin, entire, alternate leaves; promi-
QUICK in each axil. ID difficulty 2.
nent clusters of bracts 23" (58 cm) tall. Stems erect (sometimes nearby trail-
DESCRIPTION: Small, delicate annual erect), to very thin (1-3 mm), often leaning onto with faint
ing for an inch or so before reddish turning to colorless, solid and succulent, nearly Unbranched clear, or occa-
vegetation, ridges and fine light a few woolly green ascending hairs or that branches become near more the prominent base. Leaves with alternate age. entire, very (but thin, close ovate-lanceolate together on young to oblong, plants
sionally with 0.6-2.5" (15-64 mm) long, There usually
and thus appearing paired at a glance) rounded tip. Midvein lightly depressed above. minutely are bumpy
2 depressed plants develop stiff-hairy leaves length, often light means red.
with an angled secondary base and veins tapering per side, to a blunt the lower or one arising near but and not often at the cling base. to Surfaces pants or shoes as a
and hairy, especially Petioles on top. thin, Mature hairy, faintly grooved, lacking stipules, 25-50% of a blade few entire, lanceolate bracts
of seed dispersal. sessile clusters of 3-5 nestled in the axils, each cluster with with 4 parts.
Inflorescence at the base, forming small, an involucre obscuring the flowers. Flowers tiny, drab and greenish-white,
PLANTS: Three-seeded mercury (genus Acalyphya) has toothed leaves and petioles almost
CONFUSING as long as the blade. The bracts are single, broad, and lobed, while those of pellitory are multiple, narrow,
and unlobed.
HABITAT: Seasonally moist but well-drained alkaline soil in partial to heavy shade. Masonry walls, limestone
formations, trailsides, disturbed woods, especially where steep or beside large objects such as cliffs, boulders,
buildings, and large stumps. Native.
FOOD USE: When young and tender the whole plant can be used raw or cooked; it has a cucumber flavor.
Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: These mild-flavored greens are not well known by foragers but are widely available and good
when young. The much larger and better known European pellitory P. officinale has not been documented in
North America. In England it is sometimes called "pellitory against the wall." It has an affinity for calcium,
which it finds in limestone, mortar, or concrete. Pellitory in the southwestern part of our area (especially Texas)
is sometimes considered a separate species; it tends to be slightly tougher and much hairier. AKA cucumber
weed. Florida pellitory P. floridana is a cool-weather winter edible confined to the Southeast, where it is locally
prevalent as a yard weed on high-calcium sandy soils.
590
Florida pettitory
Winter growth of pellitory in Texas
withhairy leaves.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES 19 American pellitory 2 (Nettle family) Parietaria pensylvanica Urticaceae CHECK: Small, light green, erect herb with thin, entire, alternate leaves; promi- QUICK in each axil. ID difficulty 2. nent clusters of bracts 23" (58 cm) tall. Stems erect (sometimes nearby trail- DESCRIPTION: Small, delicate annual erect), to very thin (1-3 mm), often leaning onto with faint ing for an inch or so before reddish turning to colorless, solid and succulent, nearly Unbranched clear, or occa- vegetation, ridges and fine light a few woolly green ascending hairs or that branches become near more the prominent base. Leaves with alternate age. entire, very (but thin, close ovate-lanceolate together on young to oblong, plants sionally with 0.6-2.5" (15-64 mm) long, There usually and thus appearing paired at a glance) rounded tip. Midvein lightly depressed above. minutely are bumpy 2 depressed plants develop stiff-hairy leaves length, often light means red. with an angled secondary base and veins tapering per side, to a blunt the lower or one arising near but and not often at the cling base. to Surfaces pants or shoes as a and hairy, especially Petioles on top. thin, Mature hairy, faintly grooved, lacking stipules, 25-50% of a blade few entire, lanceolate bracts of seed dispersal. sessile clusters of 3-5 nestled in the axils, each cluster with with 4 parts. Inflorescence at the base, forming small, an involucre obscuring the flowers. Flowers tiny, drab and greenish-white, PLANTS: Three-seeded mercury (genus Acalyphya) has toothed leaves and petioles almost CONFUSING as long as the blade. The bracts are single, broad, and lobed, while those of pellitory are multiple, narrow, and unlobed. HABITAT: Seasonally moist but well-drained alkaline soil in partial to heavy shade. Masonry walls, limestone formations, trailsides, disturbed woods, especially where steep or beside large objects such as cliffs, boulders, buildings, and large stumps. Native. FOOD USE: When young and tender the whole plant can be used raw or cooked; it has a cucumber flavor. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: These mild-flavored greens are not well known by foragers but are widely available and good when young. The much larger and better known European pellitory P. officinale has not been documented in North America. In England it is sometimes called "pellitory against the wall." It has an affinity for calcium, which it finds in limestone, mortar, or concrete. Pellitory in the southwestern part of our area (especially Texas) is sometimes considered a separate species; it tends to be slightly tougher and much hairier. AKA cucumber weed. Florida pellitory P. floridana is a cool-weather winter edible confined to the Southeast, where it is locally prevalent as a yard weed on high-calcium sandy soils. 590 Florida pettitory Winter growth of pellitory in Texas withhairy leaves. 