BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE
20 Bush morning glory
1
Ipomoea leptophylla family Convolvulaceae
QUICK leaves, and CHECK: Large bushy herb with numerous spreading
large pink flowers. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: wide, with Large, bushy, willow-like perennial herb to 4 (1 2 m) tall and
Root spreading branches starting at the base and sweeping out then S 1.5 m)
(and underground stem) is at first narrow and vertical for 9-14' (23-36 cm) upward. before
abruptly widening into an enormous taproot that gets God-knows-how-big, but small
are still huge. The outside is light brown and somewhat rough, the inside whitish and ones stringy Stems single
or multiple, to 0.8" (2 cm) thick, tough and rigid, often reddish near the base and yellowish distally. hairless
There is a bulging yellowish ring where each branch attaches, and from these rings light colored dges or
along the stem. Leaves alternate, narrow-lanceolate to linear, 1-5" (2.5-13 cm) long, entire. the blades usually
slightly folded along the midvein, tapered to both ends and pointed with a claw or bristle tip. The surface
dark green and hairless. Midvein and secondary veins are flat to faintly raised above; below they are more
visible and slightly protruding. Secondary veins are few and at very low angles. Petioles very short out distinch
Inflorescence single or in clusters of 2-3 from leaf axils, the pedicels about 1" (2.5 cm) long, appearing jointed
where the narrow base of the flower begins. Flower buds conical, the petals spiraled just before erupting.
Flowers (summer) with a funnel-shaped corolla 2-3" (5-8 cm) wide, pinkish to purple with a darker throat
Fruit is a large spherical pod with a long, black, wispy tip, breaking apart at maturity to release its seeds.
HABITAT: Dry prairies in sandy soil; sensitive to grazing. Native.
FOOD USE: Dig up the roots at any time of year (but especially when the tops are dormant). Select the
small plants; larger ones will be too big to dig out, and the roots will be excessively fibrous. Cleaned roots can
be sliced and eaten raw or cooked and have a
mild, sweet flavor-but they are rather tough,
and they are tough to dig up. Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: The size of these roots is egend-
ary, and the legend isn't kidding. When young
and tender, it's anokay vegetable. Look between
the road and the barbed wire. which is often
the only place the cows don't graze. Because
the enormous roots store water, bush morning
glory is sometimes an island of green n a ate
summer droughty landscape.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE 20 Bush morning glory 1 Ipomoea leptophylla family Convolvulaceae QUICK leaves, and CHECK: Large bushy herb with numerous spreading large pink flowers. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: wide, with Large, bushy, willow-like perennial herb to 4 (1 2 m) tall and Root spreading branches starting at the base and sweeping out then S 1.5 m) (and underground stem) is at first narrow and vertical for 9-14' (23-36 cm) upward. before abruptly widening into an enormous taproot that gets God-knows-how-big, but small are still huge. The outside is light brown and somewhat rough, the inside whitish and ones stringy Stems single or multiple, to 0.8" (2 cm) thick, tough and rigid, often reddish near the base and yellowish distally. hairless There is a bulging yellowish ring where each branch attaches, and from these rings light colored dges or along the stem. Leaves alternate, narrow-lanceolate to linear, 1-5" (2.5-13 cm) long, entire. the blades usually slightly folded along the midvein, tapered to both ends and pointed with a claw or bristle tip. The surface dark green and hairless. Midvein and secondary veins are flat to faintly raised above; below they are more visible and slightly protruding. Secondary veins are few and at very low angles. Petioles very short out distinch Inflorescence single or in clusters of 2-3 from leaf axils, the pedicels about 1" (2.5 cm) long, appearing jointed where the narrow base of the flower begins. Flower buds conical, the petals spiraled just before erupting. Flowers (summer) with a funnel-shaped corolla 2-3" (5-8 cm) wide, pinkish to purple with a darker throat Fruit is a large spherical pod with a long, black, wispy tip, breaking apart at maturity to release its seeds. HABITAT: Dry prairies in sandy soil; sensitive to grazing. Native. FOOD USE: Dig up the roots at any time of year (but especially when the tops are dormant). Select the small plants; larger ones will be too big to dig out, and the roots will be excessively fibrous. Cleaned roots can be sliced and eaten raw or cooked and have a mild, sweet flavor-but they are rather tough, and they are tough to dig up. Conservation 3. COMMENTS: The size of these roots is egend- ary, and the legend isn't kidding. When young and tender, it's anokay vegetable. Look between the road and the barbed wire. which is often the only place the cows don't graze. Because the enormous roots store water, bush morning glory is sometimes an island of green n a ate summer droughty landscape. 