BASAL LEAVES
21 Bastard toadflax
2
family
Santalaceae
Comandra umbellata
CHECK: Clumped shin-high stems, the gray-green leaves entire, difficulty sessile, 1. smooth,
decreasing QUICK in size toward the tip; fruit shaped like a rose hip. ID
Perennial spreading by its root system to form scattered tufts. leaning Stems slen- even
DESCRIPTION: cm) tall and 2-3 mm thick, erect at first but later usually mostly or but
der, 8-20" (20-50 the ground, straight to wavy, smooth and hairless, solid, green strongly
often lying directly reddish on near the base. Branches occasional, mostly near the top or bottom,
Leaves alternate, sessile or on very short petioles, numerous and overlapping, often evenly curled distributed back toward along the
the ascending. but drastically decreasing in size distally, strongly ascending with the tips and rounded blunt
stem. stem Blades ovate to narrowly lanceolate, 0.3-1.9" (8-48 mm) long, acute at the base to below;
at the tip, light grayish green, smooth and hairless, slightly waxy. Midvein flat above and protruding
other veins are faint, flat or nearly so on both sides; veinlets are more evident below. Inflorescence a terminal
cluster (cyme) of 3-6, or, more commonly, several such cymes packed together into a crowded, flat-topped to
convex cluster (not an umbel as the name suggests, but it kind of looks like one). Flowers (May-July) 4-6 mm
wide when spread, with 5 (occasionally 4) triangular white sepal lobes (which look like petals) fused at the
base, hairy inside. There is one stamen per lobe, the anthers dull yellow, and one pistil per flower. Fruit urn-
shaped with the calyx persisting at the tip, 4-7 mm long, turning from green to reddish to brown, ripening mid
to late summer, with a thin green skin around a single nut-like seed 2-4 mm long.
HABITAT: Dry, sunny sites, especially on poor soil. Common in rocky glades, dry prairies and savannahs,
sandy open woods, beaches, ridge tops, road banks. Native.
FOOD USE: The nut-like seeds make a tasty snack. They are larger in the western part of our area. Con-
servation 1.
COMMENTS: This is not one of the plants that
hippies name their children after-neither the
scientific name nor the common one. The nutlets
are quite good-I just crunch up the shells as 1 eat
them. Too bad they are so small. Bastard toadflax
is a partially parasitic generalist that appears to
be able to steal nutrients and moisture from the
roots of virtually any plant that grows near it. At a
glance it looks like flax, but even toads make their
bedsheets from real linen. This plant is variable in
form and has been divided by some botanists into
several species.
592
BASAL LEAVES 21 Bastard toadflax 2 family Santalaceae Comandra umbellata CHECK: Clumped shin-high stems, the gray-green leaves entire, difficulty sessile, 1. smooth, decreasing QUICK in size toward the tip; fruit shaped like a rose hip. ID Perennial spreading by its root system to form scattered tufts. leaning Stems slen- even DESCRIPTION: cm) tall and 2-3 mm thick, erect at first but later usually mostly or but der, 8-20" (20-50 the ground, straight to wavy, smooth and hairless, solid, green strongly often lying directly reddish on near the base. Branches occasional, mostly near the top or bottom, Leaves alternate, sessile or on very short petioles, numerous and overlapping, often evenly curled distributed back toward along the the ascending. but drastically decreasing in size distally, strongly ascending with the tips and rounded blunt stem. stem Blades ovate to narrowly lanceolate, 0.3-1.9" (8-48 mm) long, acute at the base to below; at the tip, light grayish green, smooth and hairless, slightly waxy. Midvein flat above and protruding other veins are faint, flat or nearly so on both sides; veinlets are more evident below. Inflorescence a terminal cluster (cyme) of 3-6, or, more commonly, several such cymes packed together into a crowded, flat-topped to convex cluster (not an umbel as the name suggests, but it kind of looks like one). Flowers (May-July) 4-6 mm wide when spread, with 5 (occasionally 4) triangular white sepal lobes (which look like petals) fused at the base, hairy inside. There is one stamen per lobe, the anthers dull yellow, and one pistil per flower. Fruit urn- shaped with the calyx persisting at the tip, 4-7 mm long, turning from green to reddish to brown, ripening mid to late summer, with a thin green skin around a single nut-like seed 2-4 mm long. HABITAT: Dry, sunny sites, especially on poor soil. Common in rocky glades, dry prairies and savannahs, sandy open woods, beaches, ridge tops, road banks. Native. FOOD USE: The nut-like seeds make a tasty snack. They are larger in the western part of our area. Con- servation 1. COMMENTS: This is not one of the plants that hippies name their children after-neither the scientific name nor the common one. The nutlets are quite good-I just crunch up the shells as 1 eat them. Too bad they are so small. Bastard toadflax is a partially parasitic generalist that appears to be able to steal nutrients and moisture from the roots of virtually any plant that grows near it. At a glance it looks like flax, but even toads make their bedsheets from real linen. This plant is variable in form and has been divided by some botanists into several species. 592 