1cm
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE
22 Common dayflower
2
Commelina communis
family Commelinaceae
QUICK one small CHECK: white Clasping, alternate leaves; flowers with , large blue notal,
one below. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: near the Annual, often forming dense mats, Stems single but often
base, to 38" (1 m) long and 12" (30 cm) high, creeping to decumbent branching
ascending, sometimes rooting at the nodes, smooth and mostly round but flattened or weakly
one side above each node, solid, zigzag. Leaves alternate, widely spaced, on
long, below entire, each ovate to lanceolate, the base rounded and the tip pointed, clasping 2-5 (5-13 with veiny sheath
the leaf. Blades are slightly thick and succulent, sometimes hairy (more so 11 at the constricted
clasp stem). Veins parallel, depressed scarcely if at all, except the midvein, which is depressed point where above they
weakly keeled below. Inflorescence (mid to late summer) small clusters from the leaf axils, one blooming and at
time, on short stems hidden mostly within a large, deeply folded bract 1-2" (2.5-5 long Flowers (summer 3
early fall) last for only one day, 11-13 mm across with two larger, broad, blue petais above, these arrowed to TO a
stalked base, and one much smaller whitish petal below. There are several filaments of various lengths bearing
yellow, 3-lobed flattened anthers with a purplish spot in the center. Fruit a blunt, thick, slightly flattened capsule
on a kinked, umbilical-cord-like stalk, the capsule milky inside when young, splitting into 2 parts at maturity to
release 4 large seeds that are flattened on 1 or 2 sides.
HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in partial shade where the ground has been disturbed. Backyards, parks, forest
edges, urban woodlots. Sporadic and unpredictable but often common. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Gather the tender terminal sections of leaves and stems and eat them raw or cooked With a
mild, cucumber-like flavor, they are a pleasant wild nibble or addition to salads. The flowers and immature
seedpods can be eaten along with the greens.
COMMENTS: Pretty good, pretty common, pretty enough. Tender parts of all the dayflower species are edible
RELATED EDIBLE: Climbing dayflower C. diffusa
is another introduced species, frequent in disturbed
moist soils of the Southeast, creeping and rooting at
the nodes, the erect stems 10-12" (25-30 cm) tall and
3-5 mm thick, forming dense clumps in sunny areas.
Its sharp-tipped leaves are deeply folded when young,
reaching 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long. They are sometimes
raspy on top and the sheath suture is hairy. The flow
ers have 3 blue petals, the lower one almost as large
as the upper two. One yellow anther is much 'arger
than the others. The young greens are similarly edible.
Commelina diffusa greens
1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE 22 Common dayflower 2 Commelina communis family Commelinaceae QUICK one small CHECK: white Clasping, alternate leaves; flowers with , large blue notal, one below. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: near the Annual, often forming dense mats, Stems single but often base, to 38" (1 m) long and 12" (30 cm) high, creeping to decumbent branching ascending, sometimes rooting at the nodes, smooth and mostly round but flattened or weakly one side above each node, solid, zigzag. Leaves alternate, widely spaced, on long, below entire, each ovate to lanceolate, the base rounded and the tip pointed, clasping 2-5 (5-13 with veiny sheath the leaf. Blades are slightly thick and succulent, sometimes hairy (more so 11 at the constricted clasp stem). Veins parallel, depressed scarcely if at all, except the midvein, which is depressed point where above they weakly keeled below. Inflorescence (mid to late summer) small clusters from the leaf axils, one blooming and at time, on short stems hidden mostly within a large, deeply folded bract 1-2" (2.5-5 long Flowers (summer 3 early fall) last for only one day, 11-13 mm across with two larger, broad, blue petais above, these arrowed to TO a stalked base, and one much smaller whitish petal below. There are several filaments of various lengths bearing yellow, 3-lobed flattened anthers with a purplish spot in the center. Fruit a blunt, thick, slightly flattened capsule on a kinked, umbilical-cord-like stalk, the capsule milky inside when young, splitting into 2 parts at maturity to release 4 large seeds that are flattened on 1 or 2 sides. HABITAT: Moist, rich soil in partial shade where the ground has been disturbed. Backyards, parks, forest edges, urban woodlots. Sporadic and unpredictable but often common. Introduced. FOOD USE: Gather the tender terminal sections of leaves and stems and eat them raw or cooked With a mild, cucumber-like flavor, they are a pleasant wild nibble or addition to salads. The flowers and immature seedpods can be eaten along with the greens. COMMENTS: Pretty good, pretty common, pretty enough. Tender parts of all the dayflower species are edible RELATED EDIBLE: Climbing dayflower C. diffusa is another introduced species, frequent in disturbed moist soils of the Southeast, creeping and rooting at the nodes, the erect stems 10-12" (25-30 cm) tall and 3-5 mm thick, forming dense clumps in sunny areas. Its sharp-tipped leaves are deeply folded when young, reaching 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long. They are sometimes raspy on top and the sheath suture is hairy. The flow ers have 3 blue petals, the lower one almost as large as the upper two. One yellow anther is much 'arger than the others. The young greens are similarly edible. Commelina diffusa greens 