BASAL LEAVES
2
2
1
23 Tall dayflower
virginica
family
Commelinaceae
Commelina plant with erect zigzag stems in loose difficulty colonies, 2. the leaves
QUICK CHECK: with sheaths; Waist-high midvein very depressed, veins parallel. ID
attached spreading by rhizomes about 5 mm thick, forming (112 cm) loose tall
DESCRIPTION: Perennial herb rounded, solid, hairless to slightly hairy, unbranched to 44" or with
and 5-8 branches in the upper third. Leaves alternate, entire, several elliptic
colonies. mm Stems thick, mostly zigzag erect, between nodes spaced 2-5" (5-13 cm) apart, concentrated near
a few minor the stem, 5-8" (13-20 cm) long, flat, narrowly or roughened long-lanceolate, by very
the top of the plant, held the about drooping. 90° to Blades have fine, soft hairs below; above they below. are Veins parallel, with
tapered to a point, Midvein tip very strongly depressed above, protruding and often hairy base to a short, winged
several connecting major to clasping sheath 1-1.5" (2.5-4 cm) long. Sheath has prominent, side protruding, opposite the leaf,
short, stiff hairs. ones protruding slightly above and below. Leaves are narrowed at the darkened
petiole and is hairy/bristly a along the top; it fully encircles the stem and is fused on the where dead
where veins there is a line of long yellowish to brown hairs. Brown sheaths remain along the lower stem
leaves have withered. Inflorescence a crowded terminal cluster of several, a succession of flowers emerging
from a single folded bract about 0.8" (2 cm) long, the bract margins fused in the lower third. Flowers 0.8"
(2 cm) wide with three blue petals, one scarcely smaller than the other two. Stamens protruding and yellow,
the anthers like mini yellow pompoms. Fruit a boat-shaped capsule 4-6 mm long, hidden in the folded bract
and holding 4-5 boat-shaped seeds.
HABITAT: Moderate to light shade in rich, moist soil, especially where disturbed. Forms large colonies in
floodplain forests and hardwood flats. Also found in swamps, ditches, wet forest edges, stream banks, low
spots in woods. Native.
FOOD USE: All parts are edible raw or
cooked: Laterals from summer to fall,
shoots and leafy tops in late spring. Con-
servation 3/2.
COMMENTS: This, our largest dayflower,
is abundant and easy to recognize by its
form. It seems to replace wood nettle
in southern floodplains. AKA Virginia
dayflower.
Young greens.
Mature plant with fruit.
Related edible:
Slender
dayflower
Commelina
shorter. A native The species lower of sandy, open areas that is usually erecta
it appears absent. petal is very pale and so small that knee-high or
to justify digging human body. The rhizomes are edible shaped
like a headless The anthers are 4-lobed, sometimes at a glance
tip in spring. it up; you can nibble a few leaves from but too the small stem
544
Commelina erecta.
BASAL LEAVES 2 2 1 23 Tall dayflower virginica family Commelinaceae Commelina plant with erect zigzag stems in loose difficulty colonies, 2. the leaves QUICK CHECK: with sheaths; Waist-high midvein very depressed, veins parallel. ID attached spreading by rhizomes about 5 mm thick, forming (112 cm) loose tall DESCRIPTION: Perennial herb rounded, solid, hairless to slightly hairy, unbranched to 44" or with and 5-8 branches in the upper third. Leaves alternate, entire, several elliptic colonies. mm Stems thick, mostly zigzag erect, between nodes spaced 2-5" (5-13 cm) apart, concentrated near a few minor the stem, 5-8" (13-20 cm) long, flat, narrowly or roughened long-lanceolate, by very the top of the plant, held the about drooping. 90° to Blades have fine, soft hairs below; above they below. are Veins parallel, with tapered to a point, Midvein tip very strongly depressed above, protruding and often hairy base to a short, winged several connecting major to clasping sheath 1-1.5" (2.5-4 cm) long. Sheath has prominent, side protruding, opposite the leaf, short, stiff hairs. ones protruding slightly above and below. Leaves are narrowed at the darkened petiole and is hairy/bristly a along the top; it fully encircles the stem and is fused on the where dead where veins there is a line of long yellowish to brown hairs. Brown sheaths remain along the lower stem leaves have withered. Inflorescence a crowded terminal cluster of several, a succession of flowers emerging from a single folded bract about 0.8" (2 cm) long, the bract margins fused in the lower third. Flowers 0.8" (2 cm) wide with three blue petals, one scarcely smaller than the other two. Stamens protruding and yellow, the anthers like mini yellow pompoms. Fruit a boat-shaped capsule 4-6 mm long, hidden in the folded bract and holding 4-5 boat-shaped seeds. HABITAT: Moderate to light shade in rich, moist soil, especially where disturbed. Forms large colonies in floodplain forests and hardwood flats. Also found in swamps, ditches, wet forest edges, stream banks, low spots in woods. Native. FOOD USE: All parts are edible raw or cooked: Laterals from summer to fall, shoots and leafy tops in late spring. Con- servation 3/2. COMMENTS: This, our largest dayflower, is abundant and easy to recognize by its form. It seems to replace wood nettle in southern floodplains. AKA Virginia dayflower. Young greens. Mature plant with fruit. Related edible: Slender dayflower Commelina shorter. A native The species lower of sandy, open areas that is usually erecta it appears absent. petal is very pale and so small that knee-high or to justify digging human body. The rhizomes are edible shaped like a headless The anthers are 4-lobed, sometimes at a glance tip in spring. it up; you can nibble a few leaves from but too the small stem 544 Commelina erecta. 