LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE
24 White twisted-stalk
Streptopus amplexifolius 3 Liliaceae 3 (Lily family)
clasping QUICK CHECK: leaves and Belly-high white flowers. plant; ID stems difficulty smooth, 2. glaucous, zigzag, and forked, with
DESCRIPTION: Stems 0.2-0.6" Perennial to 44" (112 cm) tall, forming
near the base, which (5-15 mm) thick, erect to leaning or arching, loose colonies by rhizome.
purple spots. Stems is have wrapped a by a hairy sheath. In the shoot stage, smooth stem and bases glaucous except
wrapped around generally appearing entire but they may have scattered clasping the stem
at the base, bifurcating branch pattern. Leaves alternate, are pink with
often acuminate the stem as a sheath. The blades are ovate to elliptic, minute teeth. The lowest leaves remain
3 major ones deeply at the tip, green above and pale gray below, hairless (including 1.5-3.5" on the (4-9 cm) long, pointed and
veins; between depressed above and strongly protruding below; there margins). Veins parallel,
in pairs) from these are many small ones essentially flat on both sides. Inflorescence are a few less deeply depressed
7-9 mm the leaf axils, on a long, very thin, and distinctly twisted or kinked pedicel. Flower single (or occasionally
with a darker across, drooping, bell-like with 6 long, narrow, white to pinkish tepals strongly curled (early summer)
8-12 stripe down the center. Fruit (late summer) a soft, bright red, juicy berry, spherical backward, to elliptic. usually
mm long, containing several seeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Rosy twisted stalk is much smaller on average, more leaning or arching, and has leaf
margins with stiff, hooked hairs. False Solomon's seal has rough-hairy leaf margins and the stems de not fork.
False hellebore (p. 674) is much more leafy when emerging.
HABITAT: Forests with rich, moist, rocky soil, especially openings near seeps and streams. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender shoots and greens in spring and early summer are excellent and mild, with less bitterness
than most of its relatives, reminiscent of cucumber. They can be eaten raw or cooked. The berries make a
nice nibble when they are ripe in late summer, but in quantity are reported to be laxative. Conservation 3/1.
COMMENTS: This species probably has the best greens among the many similar edible plants that have
alternate leaves with parallel veins (the "Solamon's seal group"). In some regions, particularly in the southern
part of its range, it has suffered greatly from overbrowsing by deer and should not be collected. However, it
is widespread and common in many remote areas. AKA clasping twisted-stalk.
595
LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE 24 White twisted-stalk Streptopus amplexifolius 3 Liliaceae 3 (Lily family) clasping QUICK CHECK: leaves and Belly-high white flowers. plant; ID stems difficulty smooth, 2. glaucous, zigzag, and forked, with DESCRIPTION: Stems 0.2-0.6" Perennial to 44" (112 cm) tall, forming near the base, which (5-15 mm) thick, erect to leaning or arching, loose colonies by rhizome. purple spots. Stems is have wrapped a by a hairy sheath. In the shoot stage, smooth stem and bases glaucous except wrapped around generally appearing entire but they may have scattered clasping the stem at the base, bifurcating branch pattern. Leaves alternate, are pink with often acuminate the stem as a sheath. The blades are ovate to elliptic, minute teeth. The lowest leaves remain 3 major ones deeply at the tip, green above and pale gray below, hairless (including 1.5-3.5" on the (4-9 cm) long, pointed and veins; between depressed above and strongly protruding below; there margins). Veins parallel, in pairs) from these are many small ones essentially flat on both sides. Inflorescence are a few less deeply depressed 7-9 mm the leaf axils, on a long, very thin, and distinctly twisted or kinked pedicel. Flower single (or occasionally with a darker across, drooping, bell-like with 6 long, narrow, white to pinkish tepals strongly curled (early summer) 8-12 stripe down the center. Fruit (late summer) a soft, bright red, juicy berry, spherical backward, to elliptic. usually mm long, containing several seeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: Rosy twisted stalk is much smaller on average, more leaning or arching, and has leaf margins with stiff, hooked hairs. False Solomon's seal has rough-hairy leaf margins and the stems de not fork. False hellebore (p. 674) is much more leafy when emerging. HABITAT: Forests with rich, moist, rocky soil, especially openings near seeps and streams. Native. FOOD USE: Tender shoots and greens in spring and early summer are excellent and mild, with less bitterness than most of its relatives, reminiscent of cucumber. They can be eaten raw or cooked. The berries make a nice nibble when they are ripe in late summer, but in quantity are reported to be laxative. Conservation 3/1. COMMENTS: This species probably has the best greens among the many similar edible plants that have alternate leaves with parallel veins (the "Solamon's seal group"). In some regions, particularly in the southern part of its range, it has suffered greatly from overbrowsing by deer and should not be collected. However, it is widespread and common in many remote areas. AKA clasping twisted-stalk. 595 