26 Large Bellwort
2
1
Uvularia grandiflorum family Colchicaceae
QUICK ID difficulty CHECK: 2. Thin stem with entire alternate leaves; yellow flowers droopinz.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial herb from a short rhizome. Stem 12-18" (30-46 cm) tall and
2-5 mm thick, solid, smooth, glaucous gray-green, arching, usually with a few major
branches, the tips drooping when in bloom, stiffer in fruit. Shoots erect, the leaves wrapped
into a tight spear. Leaves alternate, entire, long-elliptic, pointed, with the stem puncturing
the blade near the base (perfoliate), hairless on the upper surface but the underside is dense with minute hairs.
Veins parallel, a few major ones depressed above; otherwise the blade is smooth. There are multiple sheaths
around the lower stem, separating from it and loose near the tip, but the sheath edges are fused in the lower
part. When young, the leaves are drooping and often spiraled; older leaves are flatter and stiffer, showing the
perfoliation more clearly. Flowers (spring) bell-like, dangling singly from leaf axils, with 6 yellow petals up to
1.8" (46 mm) long, usually spiraled, not spreading open. Fruit (early summer) a 3-sided green pod.
CONFUSING PLANTS: In the shoot stage this plant can be easily confused with Solomon's seal and false
Solomon's seal, but these species are similarly edible.
HABITAT: Hardwood forests with rich soil. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather young shoots when leaves are still furled up and flowers have yet to emerge. They can
be eaten raw but are better cooked, in which case they are just okay. The tender greens at the stem tips can
also be eaten through early flowering. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: The shoots are small and not very practical as a food source, but every now and then I grab a
few to cook. I know one person who thinks the greens are great, but I'm not keen on them.
RELATED EDIBLES: At least 3 other, smaller species of bellwort are found in our region: U. perfoliate,
U. puberula, and U. sessifolia. These can be eaten but are really too small to bother with.
597
26 Large Bellwort 2 1 Uvularia grandiflorum family Colchicaceae QUICK ID difficulty CHECK: 2. Thin stem with entire alternate leaves; yellow flowers droopinz. DESCRIPTION: Perennial herb from a short rhizome. Stem 12-18" (30-46 cm) tall and 2-5 mm thick, solid, smooth, glaucous gray-green, arching, usually with a few major branches, the tips drooping when in bloom, stiffer in fruit. Shoots erect, the leaves wrapped into a tight spear. Leaves alternate, entire, long-elliptic, pointed, with the stem puncturing the blade near the base (perfoliate), hairless on the upper surface but the underside is dense with minute hairs. Veins parallel, a few major ones depressed above; otherwise the blade is smooth. There are multiple sheaths around the lower stem, separating from it and loose near the tip, but the sheath edges are fused in the lower part. When young, the leaves are drooping and often spiraled; older leaves are flatter and stiffer, showing the perfoliation more clearly. Flowers (spring) bell-like, dangling singly from leaf axils, with 6 yellow petals up to 1.8" (46 mm) long, usually spiraled, not spreading open. Fruit (early summer) a 3-sided green pod. CONFUSING PLANTS: In the shoot stage this plant can be easily confused with Solomon's seal and false Solomon's seal, but these species are similarly edible. HABITAT: Hardwood forests with rich soil. Native. FOOD USE: Gather young shoots when leaves are still furled up and flowers have yet to emerge. They can be eaten raw but are better cooked, in which case they are just okay. The tender greens at the stem tips can also be eaten through early flowering. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: The shoots are small and not very practical as a food source, but every now and then I grab a few to cook. I know one person who thinks the greens are great, but I'm not keen on them. RELATED EDIBLES: At least 3 other, smaller species of bellwort are found in our region: U. perfoliate, U. puberula, and U. sessifolia. These can be eaten but are really too small to bother with. 597 