BASAL
2
25 Rosy twisted-stalk lanceolatus
Liliaceae
(Lily
family)
Streptopus Shin-high plant with br anching, zigzag, difficulty arching 2. stem, alternate leaves
with raspy hairs on Perennial the from a short rhizome, spreading zigzag, to 12-26" form small (30-66 colonies. cm) tall
QUICK CHECK: margin, and red berries. ID
DESCRIPTION: clumped, arching, (reddish
and Stems single mm thick, to closely round spaced with several and almost small wing-ridges, gland-tipped solid. hairs, The mostly surface on the is green wings, more so
3-5 base when young) with scattered, stiff, simple if present, 2-4 on robust stems. Leaves alternate, elliptic, sessile 1-2.5
near at the the nodes and (the toward lowest the leaf tip. Branches strongly clasping, sheath-like. the and middle, later withering), these deeply ovate depressed to above and
(2.5-6.5 to slightly cm) clasping long. Veins parallel, 2-3 major ones on each side of
protruding below, giving the leaf a pleated
look. Margins entire, downcurved, especially
on older leaves, with stiff, curved, forward-
pointing hairs. Flowers (spring) hang singly
or occasionally in pairs from leaf axils, the
thread-like pedicels curved but not kinked or
twisted. Six petals form a bell 6-8 mm long.
white to pink or purple with darker markings
inside, the sharp ends spread outward and
recurved. Fruit (late summer) a spherical,
red, juicy, partly translucent berry 6 mm
across, the skin smooth and glossy, contain-
ing 3-10 lopsided-ovoid whitish seeds that
are tough but not crunchy.
CONFUSING SPECIES: White twisted-
stalk is a more robust plant, told apart before
flowering by its more clasping leaves and the
lack of stiff hairs on leaf margins and stems.
False Solomon's seal leaf margins have hairs
that are stiff but not hooked or curved.
HABITAT: Forests where there is an accu-
mulation of moist, slightly acidic organic
matter in the soil, often near boulders or
the base of tree trunks; conifer or mixed
forests, especially with white birch or red
oak. Native.
FOOD USE: Pick the tender tips of growing
plants in spring and very early summer. The
greens have a mild cucumber flavor-bet-
ter raw, in my opinion. Unlike some plants
in this section, you don't want to throw out
the leaves; they're most of what you get. The
cucumbery berries can be eaten raw in late
summer. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: The berries are really just a
decorative nibble-nothing to be picked in
quantity Their faintly sweet cucumber-like
flavor does not deliver on the high expecta-
tions levied by the truit's brilliant color The
young greens of rosy twisted stalk are
quite as good as those of its larger cousin. not
596
BASAL 2 25 Rosy twisted-stalk lanceolatus Liliaceae (Lily family) Streptopus Shin-high plant with br anching, zigzag, difficulty arching 2. stem, alternate leaves with raspy hairs on Perennial the from a short rhizome, spreading zigzag, to 12-26" form small (30-66 colonies. cm) tall QUICK CHECK: margin, and red berries. ID DESCRIPTION: clumped, arching, (reddish and Stems single mm thick, to closely round spaced with several and almost small wing-ridges, gland-tipped solid. hairs, The mostly surface on the is green wings, more so 3-5 base when young) with scattered, stiff, simple if present, 2-4 on robust stems. Leaves alternate, elliptic, sessile 1-2.5 near at the the nodes and (the toward lowest the leaf tip. Branches strongly clasping, sheath-like. the and middle, later withering), these deeply ovate depressed to above and (2.5-6.5 to slightly cm) clasping long. Veins parallel, 2-3 major ones on each side of protruding below, giving the leaf a pleated look. Margins entire, downcurved, especially on older leaves, with stiff, curved, forward- pointing hairs. Flowers (spring) hang singly or occasionally in pairs from leaf axils, the thread-like pedicels curved but not kinked or twisted. Six petals form a bell 6-8 mm long. white to pink or purple with darker markings inside, the sharp ends spread outward and recurved. Fruit (late summer) a spherical, red, juicy, partly translucent berry 6 mm across, the skin smooth and glossy, contain- ing 3-10 lopsided-ovoid whitish seeds that are tough but not crunchy. CONFUSING SPECIES: White twisted- stalk is a more robust plant, told apart before flowering by its more clasping leaves and the lack of stiff hairs on leaf margins and stems. False Solomon's seal leaf margins have hairs that are stiff but not hooked or curved. HABITAT: Forests where there is an accu- mulation of moist, slightly acidic organic matter in the soil, often near boulders or the base of tree trunks; conifer or mixed forests, especially with white birch or red oak. Native. FOOD USE: Pick the tender tips of growing plants in spring and very early summer. The greens have a mild cucumber flavor-bet- ter raw, in my opinion. Unlike some plants in this section, you don't want to throw out the leaves; they're most of what you get. The cucumbery berries can be eaten raw in late summer. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: The berries are really just a decorative nibble-nothing to be picked in quantity Their faintly sweet cucumber-like flavor does not deliver on the high expecta- tions levied by the truit's brilliant color The young greens of rosy twisted stalk are quite as good as those of its larger cousin. not 596 