BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE
27 Smooth Solomon's seal 1
3
Polygonatum biflorum Asparagaceae (Asparagus family)
QUICK CHECK: Arching unbranched herb with a smooth stem and flowers hanging in
small clusters from leaf axils. ID difficulty 2.
Perennial herb forming colonies by rhizome. Rhizome whitish, thick from but
DESCRIPTION: with transverse constrictions, moderately fibrous, showing prominent and scars 0.2-0.8"
irregular stems. Stem single, unbranched, arching, 1-6' (30-180 long have the
previous mm) years' thick, round, solid, smooth, hairless, bloom-covered. Shoots initially cm)
leaves rolled angled at the base and broadly pointed at the tip, the margins entire and hairless. (1-3 Surfaces mm),
(5-20 into a sharp tip pointing vertically. Leaves alternate, clasping, 1-6" (2.5-15
long, elliptic, and hairless on both sides, somewhat glaucous below. Veins parallel, very close together axils, the
smooth of them very deeply depressed above. Inflorescence small clusters of 2-10 hanging from leaf tubular,
some peduncles to 2" (5 cm) long. Flowers (early to mid summer) whitish green, 0.5-0.9" (13-23 mm) long,
the tip split into 6 lobes. Fruit a round berry 6-12 mm, the surface smooth and bloom-coated, the flesh green,
containing a few large whitish seeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: False Solomon's seal has rough-hairy leaf margins and flowers in a large terminal panicle.
HABITAT: Open woodlands, forest edges, and savannahs on well-drained, rich soil. Native.
FOOD USE: Rhizomes can be gathered all year but are best in the dormant season. They can be cooked as
a vegetable or added to stews. Gather shoots in spring before the leaves unfurl. Discard leaves and cook the
stems like asparagus. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: These plants are sensitive to overharvest and should be used sparingly and only where thriv-
ing. The rhizomes of robust plants can be a large vegetable, but I find the flavor slightly disagreeable. Shoots
are delicious, however-among the few wild vegetables that actually taste similar to asparagus. There is an
abnormally large form that has been separated as P. commutatum, (giant Solomon's seal)-although some
claim this is just a chromosome abnormality and not a real species. These large plants are the best ones to eat.
RELATED EDIBLE: Small Solomon's seal Polygonatum pubescens is much smaller and sometimes branches. it
typically has only 1-2 flowers or fruits per leaf axil, and the leaves have faint pubescence on the more promi-
nent veins of the undersurface. The shoots of this species are good but almost too small to bother with. The
rhizomes are tiny and don't taste very good.
598
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE 27 Smooth Solomon's seal 1 3 Polygonatum biflorum Asparagaceae (Asparagus family) QUICK CHECK: Arching unbranched herb with a smooth stem and flowers hanging in small clusters from leaf axils. ID difficulty 2. Perennial herb forming colonies by rhizome. Rhizome whitish, thick from but DESCRIPTION: with transverse constrictions, moderately fibrous, showing prominent and scars 0.2-0.8" irregular stems. Stem single, unbranched, arching, 1-6' (30-180 long have the previous mm) years' thick, round, solid, smooth, hairless, bloom-covered. Shoots initially cm) leaves rolled angled at the base and broadly pointed at the tip, the margins entire and hairless. (1-3 Surfaces mm), (5-20 into a sharp tip pointing vertically. Leaves alternate, clasping, 1-6" (2.5-15 long, elliptic, and hairless on both sides, somewhat glaucous below. Veins parallel, very close together axils, the smooth of them very deeply depressed above. Inflorescence small clusters of 2-10 hanging from leaf tubular, some peduncles to 2" (5 cm) long. Flowers (early to mid summer) whitish green, 0.5-0.9" (13-23 mm) long, the tip split into 6 lobes. Fruit a round berry 6-12 mm, the surface smooth and bloom-coated, the flesh green, containing a few large whitish seeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: False Solomon's seal has rough-hairy leaf margins and flowers in a large terminal panicle. HABITAT: Open woodlands, forest edges, and savannahs on well-drained, rich soil. Native. FOOD USE: Rhizomes can be gathered all year but are best in the dormant season. They can be cooked as a vegetable or added to stews. Gather shoots in spring before the leaves unfurl. Discard leaves and cook the stems like asparagus. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: These plants are sensitive to overharvest and should be used sparingly and only where thriv- ing. The rhizomes of robust plants can be a large vegetable, but I find the flavor slightly disagreeable. Shoots are delicious, however-among the few wild vegetables that actually taste similar to asparagus. There is an abnormally large form that has been separated as P. commutatum, (giant Solomon's seal)-although some claim this is just a chromosome abnormality and not a real species. These large plants are the best ones to eat. RELATED EDIBLE: Small Solomon's seal Polygonatum pubescens is much smaller and sometimes branches. it typically has only 1-2 flowers or fruits per leaf axil, and the leaves have faint pubescence on the more promi- nent veins of the undersurface. The shoots of this species are good but almost too small to bother with. The rhizomes are tiny and don't taste very good. 598 