BASAL LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE
28 False Solomon's seal
2
Maianthemum
NG-91
racemosum
Asparagaceae
(Asparagus
family)
QUICK large CHECK: Arching unbranched herb with entire alternate leaves and Howers in a
terminal panicle. ID difficulty 3.
DESCRIPTION: Colony-forming perennial from tough, yellowish, branching
7-10 mm thick. Stems 18-44" (46-112 cm) long and 4-12 mm thick, solid, rhizomes
faintly with roughened, reddish-purple near the nodes, arching, zigzag, unbranched. slightly Shoots ridged,
large reddish sheaths; shoot leaves pressed into a spear-like tip. Leaves alternate, erect
broadly elliptic, entire, 3-6" (8-15 cm) long, angled at the base and pointed at the tip, often acuminate. Surface
with short hairs above and denser, longer hairs below. Veins parallel, the major ones deeply depressed above
and protruding below. Minor veins are faintly incised below. The leaf is somewhat pleated along the major veins.
Margins entire with stiff hairs. Leaves are sessile or have an extremely short, usually maroon, petiole-like
constriction at the base. Inflorescence a slightly Christmas-tree shaped terminal panicle of 30-400 flowers,
2-7" (5-18 cm) long, the branches in the form of racemes. Pedicels 1-2 mm long, white, right angled to the
rachis. Flowers (late spring to early summer) 3 mm across with 6 tiny linear white tepals, the white stamens
thicker and longer than the tepals. Fruits spherical, 3-5mm, gold at first but soft and red when ripe, containing
a single, round, light-colored seed with a darker "eye" spot.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Solomon's seals and bellworts have smooth leaves and smooth, unridged stems.
White twisted-stalk has forked stems. False hellebore (p. 674)
has larger, broader leaves and never appears as an elongated.
pointed, leafless shoot.
HABITAT: Moderately shaded forests of hardwoods or mixed
conifers and hardwoods, on well-drained but rich soils. Especially
common under oak and white pine. Native.
FOOD USE: Rhizomes can be dug all year. They were traditionally
soaked in wood ash lye to denature their irritating quality. then
boiled as a vegetable. Gather shoots in spring before the leaves
unfurl; discard leaves and cook the stems. Collect ripe berries in
fall and nibble them raw-they are very sweet but have a bitter
aftertaste. Conservation 3/2/1.
COMMENTS: The best edible part of this common and wide
spread woodland plant is the shoot; the tough rhizome and bitter-
sweet berries are only marginal. Gather the shoots sparingly
from healthy populations. AKA Solomon's plume, spikenard.
Smilacina racemosa. Starry Solomon's plume Maianthemum stei-
latum is a smaller but similar plant that grows in dense colonies
in moist, sandy soil. The leaves are narrower, and the unripe fruit
is attractively bicolored. The edible parts are of poor quality
BASAL LEAVES ALTERNATE AND ENTIRE 28 False Solomon's seal 2 Maianthemum NG-91 racemosum Asparagaceae (Asparagus family) QUICK large CHECK: Arching unbranched herb with entire alternate leaves and Howers in a terminal panicle. ID difficulty 3. DESCRIPTION: Colony-forming perennial from tough, yellowish, branching 7-10 mm thick. Stems 18-44" (46-112 cm) long and 4-12 mm thick, solid, rhizomes faintly with roughened, reddish-purple near the nodes, arching, zigzag, unbranched. slightly Shoots ridged, large reddish sheaths; shoot leaves pressed into a spear-like tip. Leaves alternate, erect broadly elliptic, entire, 3-6" (8-15 cm) long, angled at the base and pointed at the tip, often acuminate. Surface with short hairs above and denser, longer hairs below. Veins parallel, the major ones deeply depressed above and protruding below. Minor veins are faintly incised below. The leaf is somewhat pleated along the major veins. Margins entire with stiff hairs. Leaves are sessile or have an extremely short, usually maroon, petiole-like constriction at the base. Inflorescence a slightly Christmas-tree shaped terminal panicle of 30-400 flowers, 2-7" (5-18 cm) long, the branches in the form of racemes. Pedicels 1-2 mm long, white, right angled to the rachis. Flowers (late spring to early summer) 3 mm across with 6 tiny linear white tepals, the white stamens thicker and longer than the tepals. Fruits spherical, 3-5mm, gold at first but soft and red when ripe, containing a single, round, light-colored seed with a darker "eye" spot. CONFUSING PLANTS: Solomon's seals and bellworts have smooth leaves and smooth, unridged stems. White twisted-stalk has forked stems. False hellebore (p. 674) has larger, broader leaves and never appears as an elongated. pointed, leafless shoot. HABITAT: Moderately shaded forests of hardwoods or mixed conifers and hardwoods, on well-drained but rich soils. Especially common under oak and white pine. Native. FOOD USE: Rhizomes can be dug all year. They were traditionally soaked in wood ash lye to denature their irritating quality. then boiled as a vegetable. Gather shoots in spring before the leaves unfurl; discard leaves and cook the stems. Collect ripe berries in fall and nibble them raw-they are very sweet but have a bitter aftertaste. Conservation 3/2/1. COMMENTS: The best edible part of this common and wide spread woodland plant is the shoot; the tough rhizome and bitter- sweet berries are only marginal. Gather the shoots sparingly from healthy populations. AKA Solomon's plume, spikenard. Smilacina racemosa. Starry Solomon's plume Maianthemum stei- latum is a smaller but similar plant that grows in dense colonies in moist, sandy soil. The leaves are narrower, and the unripe fruit is attractively bicolored. The edible parts are of poor quality 