BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT,
colonial To use this (see key glossary). you may A need few GROUP plants to LEAVES review have 36 the bumps here ALTERNATE, difference or on in group the leaf between 35. margins TOOTHED I have clumped included that these may and
be considered teeth, in and this these key even might though key it has basal evident. leaves because
wilt American rather bellflower early in spring, and by flowering they are not
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 36
The key is not your final answer!
Stems single, not appearing connected to other stems.
Leaves hairless.
Stems opaque, solid, and ridged or winged: leaves with blunt to wavy teeth.
1. Lambsquarters
Plant taller than wide, the leaves often mealy-white below.
6. Black nightshade
or or
Plant as wide or wider than tall, the leaves not mealy below.
2. Jewelweed
Stems roundish, hollow, and transparent; leaves with needle-teeth.
Leaves with hairs on one or more sides.
Plants distinctly taller than wide.
Leaves lanceolate, narrowly elliptic, or linear.
Leaf lanceolate, sap milky, flowers bluish-purple. American bellflower (p. 337).
or
or
Leaf narrowly elliptic to linear, sap not milky. Horseweed (p. 580).
or
Leaves broadly ovate or heart-shaped, mostly over 3" (8 cm) long.
Leaf and stem covered with short, stiff hairs; sandpapery feeling.
3. Sunflower
or
Leaf and stem covered with short, soft hairs: velvety feeling.
4. Velvetleaf
Leaves elliptic, less than 3" long.
5. Prickly sida
Plants as wide or wider than tall.
Petais separated more than half their length, flowers in clusters, fruit not in a papery husk.
6. Black nightshade
Petals fused to the tip, flowers single, fruit in a papery husk.
7. Ground-cherry
Stems colonial, usually multiple but not clumped; connected by rhizomes.
Leaves on long petioles, with stingers, the blade broadly ovate to heart-shaped.
8. Wood nettle
Leaves sessile or on petioles < 10% of blade length, lanceolate and tapered at the base,
or
without stingers.
Leaves soft-woolly and silvery-white below.
9. Serrated sage
Leaves roughened by minute hairs but not silvery.
10. Common goldenrod
Leaves hairless on both sides.
Stems usually clumped, the bases touching or nearly so.
11. Ditch stonecrop
Leaves ovate to obovate, blunt-tipped, thick and fleshy-succulent.
Leaves narrowly elliptic to lanceolate, sharp-tipped, not thick and succulent.
12. Orpine
Sap not milky; leaves coated with very fine, soft, appressed hairs.
Sap milky, leaves hairless.
13. Bigfruit evening-primrose
14. Appalachian bellflower
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, colonial To use this (see key glossary). you may A need few GROUP plants to LEAVES review have 36 the bumps here ALTERNATE, difference or on in group the leaf between 35. margins TOOTHED I have clumped included that these may and be considered teeth, in and this these key even might though key it has basal evident. leaves because wilt American rather bellflower early in spring, and by flowering they are not TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 36 The key is not your final answer! Stems single, not appearing connected to other stems. Leaves hairless. Stems opaque, solid, and ridged or winged: leaves with blunt to wavy teeth. 1. Lambsquarters Plant taller than wide, the leaves often mealy-white below. 6. Black nightshade or or Plant as wide or wider than tall, the leaves not mealy below. 2. Jewelweed Stems roundish, hollow, and transparent; leaves with needle-teeth. Leaves with hairs on one or more sides. Plants distinctly taller than wide. Leaves lanceolate, narrowly elliptic, or linear. Leaf lanceolate, sap milky, flowers bluish-purple. American bellflower (p. 337). or or Leaf narrowly elliptic to linear, sap not milky. Horseweed (p. 580). or Leaves broadly ovate or heart-shaped, mostly over 3" (8 cm) long. Leaf and stem covered with short, stiff hairs; sandpapery feeling. 3. Sunflower or Leaf and stem covered with short, soft hairs: velvety feeling. 4. Velvetleaf Leaves elliptic, less than 3" long. 5. Prickly sida Plants as wide or wider than tall. Petais separated more than half their length, flowers in clusters, fruit not in a papery husk. 6. Black nightshade Petals fused to the tip, flowers single, fruit in a papery husk. 7. Ground-cherry Stems colonial, usually multiple but not clumped; connected by rhizomes. Leaves on long petioles, with stingers, the blade broadly ovate to heart-shaped. 8. Wood nettle Leaves sessile or on petioles < 10% of blade length, lanceolate and tapered at the base, or without stingers. Leaves soft-woolly and silvery-white below. 9. Serrated sage Leaves roughened by minute hairs but not silvery. 10. Common goldenrod Leaves hairless on both sides. Stems usually clumped, the bases touching or nearly so. 11. Ditch stonecrop Leaves ovate to obovate, blunt-tipped, thick and fleshy-succulent. Leaves narrowly elliptic to lanceolate, sharp-tipped, not thick and succulent. 12. Orpine Sap not milky; leaves coated with very fine, soft, appressed hairs. Sap milky, leaves hairless. 13. Bigfruit evening-primrose 14. Appalachian bellflower 