BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
Lambsquarters
3
2
Ll
FH-186
Chenopodium
(in
part)
family
Amaranthaceae
QUICK CHECK: Diamond-shaped leaves with a few large teeth, growing tips after
covered with a light, powdery coating; clusters of small, unshowy flowers and Fill
fruits. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Branchy annual herb, the limbs ascending. Stems erect, 1-10 (30-300 cm)
tall and up to 1.2" (3 cm) thick, solid, hairless, ridged, mostly green but sometimes red.
especially near the nodes. Leaves alternate, 1-4" (2.5-10 cm) long, moderately thick and
semi-succulent, lanceolate to triangular or diamond-shaped, sometimes broad and resem-
bling the namesake goose's foot, the base broadly angled with straight edges, the blades flat. Surface dull
bluish-green above but grayish-green below with a powdery coating that is often very prominent, especially
on the tips of vigorously growing shoots. Midvein and secondary veins are slightly depressed above; veinlets
mostly flat and obscure. Margins may be entire (especially on narrow leaves), wavy, or coarsely and irregularly
toothed with large blunt teeth-but teeth usually appear only distal to the widest point. Petioles 40-80% of
blade length, roundish with a small groove on top. Inflorescence dense and often very large branching clus-
ters at the ends of stems and in upper leaf axils, spike-like with sessile flowers. Flowers tiny and unshowy.
Seeds dark, roundish, semi-flat, 1-1.5 mm across, enclosed in a granular, usually adhering coat.
SPECIES: There are multiple common species that go by the name of lambsquarters, and few foragers dis-
tinguish them. There are native and non-native species.
HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny ground such as gardens, crop fields, construction sites, logged areas, steep
sunny slopes, road shoulders, floodplains, and shores. Seeds can remain dormant for centuries and then
germinate after disturbance.
FOOD USE: Gather tender leafy tops of young plants from spring through early autumn-most commonly in
late spring through early summer. They can be eaten raw or cooked in any way you would use spinach. On older and
plants can pluck individual leaves, which will remain tender while the stems toughen. In late summer After drying
you the fruiting heads can be gathered by hand-stripping or beating them into a container. the
autumn, off the chaff (see p. 27), the seeds should be soaked, rubbed, and drained to remove Conservation sapo- 1.
and nins rubbing in the seedcoat. Then they can be cooked into a porridge or dried and ground into flour.
This is one of the best known and most commonly used wild plants in North America. have been It is
COMMENTS: related to spinach, tastes similar, and is exceptionally nutritious. Various species, including quinoa, and winnow-
domesticated for seed production. Separation
ing seeds of the wild plants is actually very labor-efficient
if you have the appropriate equipment and technique.
AKA goosefoot, fat hen, pigweed, wild spinach.
(AMY) - - -
-
-
-
X
\
\
-
-
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED Lambsquarters 3 2 Ll FH-186 Chenopodium (in part) family Amaranthaceae QUICK CHECK: Diamond-shaped leaves with a few large teeth, growing tips after covered with a light, powdery coating; clusters of small, unshowy flowers and Fill fruits. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Branchy annual herb, the limbs ascending. Stems erect, 1-10 (30-300 cm) tall and up to 1.2" (3 cm) thick, solid, hairless, ridged, mostly green but sometimes red. especially near the nodes. Leaves alternate, 1-4" (2.5-10 cm) long, moderately thick and semi-succulent, lanceolate to triangular or diamond-shaped, sometimes broad and resem- bling the namesake goose's foot, the base broadly angled with straight edges, the blades flat. Surface dull bluish-green above but grayish-green below with a powdery coating that is often very prominent, especially on the tips of vigorously growing shoots. Midvein and secondary veins are slightly depressed above; veinlets mostly flat and obscure. Margins may be entire (especially on narrow leaves), wavy, or coarsely and irregularly toothed with large blunt teeth-but teeth usually appear only distal to the widest point. Petioles 40-80% of blade length, roundish with a small groove on top. Inflorescence dense and often very large branching clus- ters at the ends of stems and in upper leaf axils, spike-like with sessile flowers. Flowers tiny and unshowy. Seeds dark, roundish, semi-flat, 1-1.5 mm across, enclosed in a granular, usually adhering coat. SPECIES: There are multiple common species that go by the name of lambsquarters, and few foragers dis- tinguish them. There are native and non-native species. HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny ground such as gardens, crop fields, construction sites, logged areas, steep sunny slopes, road shoulders, floodplains, and shores. Seeds can remain dormant for centuries and then germinate after disturbance. FOOD USE: Gather tender leafy tops of young plants from spring through early autumn-most commonly in late spring through early summer. They can be eaten raw or cooked in any way you would use spinach. On older and plants can pluck individual leaves, which will remain tender while the stems toughen. In late summer After drying you the fruiting heads can be gathered by hand-stripping or beating them into a container. the autumn, off the chaff (see p. 27), the seeds should be soaked, rubbed, and drained to remove Conservation sapo- 1. and nins rubbing in the seedcoat. Then they can be cooked into a porridge or dried and ground into flour. This is one of the best known and most commonly used wild plants in North America. have been It is COMMENTS: related to spinach, tastes similar, and is exceptionally nutritious. Various species, including quinoa, and winnow- domesticated for seed production. Separation ing seeds of the wild plants is actually very labor-efficient if you have the appropriate equipment and technique. AKA goosefoot, fat hen, pigweed, wild spinach. (AMY) - - - - - - X \ \ - - 