mm
0
1cm
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
Yellow jewelweed flowers.
Orange jewelweed pods.
Jewelweed seeds
3 Sunflower 3
Helianthus annuus
+
Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK CHECK: Tall, stout plant with spreading branches and large, rough, heart-shaped
leaves; sunflowers with yellow rays and dark disks. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Large, widely-branching annual. Stems coarse, stout, 2-7' (60-210 cm)
tall and up to 1.2" (3 cm) thick, solid, aromatic, with a few large ascending branches. The
surface is tacky, rough-hairy with hairs both long and short, purple and green mottled,
with many small ridges and a few larger grooves. Leaves mostly alternate (lower ones
Much more
paired), broadly triangular, ovate or heart-shaped, blunt-tipped, to 12" (30 cm) long and
common in the
almost as broad. Blades rough-hairy, especially beneath and on veins, with 2 prominent,
western half of
light-colored, arching secondary veins from the base. Veins faintly depressed above.
the range.
Margins irregularly large-toothed, wavy, or sometimes entire. Petioles 40-100% of
blade length, channeled, rough-hairy. Inflorescence solitary, nodding composite heads, on peduncles 6-15"
(15-38 cm) long, 3-23 per plant. Heads (mid summer to fall) 2-4.6" (5-12 cm) across, bearing numerous bracts
with acuminate tips. The disk is brown, nearly flat to convex, 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) across. Ray florets are about 1"
(2.5 cm) long and bright yellow. Seeds resemble those of domestic sunflowers but are smaller and narrower.
CONFUSING PLANTS: There are many other native sunflowers, but they tend to have narrower leaves,
smaller heads, and/or yellow disks. The seeds of all are safe to eat.
HABITAT: Dry, sunny, disturbed ground, especially along highways, ravines, and river floodplains; most
common in the Great Plains. Native.
Gather seedheads in late summer as they ripen. You'll know they are ripe because the dry florets the
FOOD USE: the seeds, when vigorously rubbed, will detach from the receptacle. Once cooked. separated, Conservation 1.
seeds, will fall then off and rub them to loosen the hulls and winnow. Flower buds can also be eaten
ancestor of the cultivated sunflower, which was domesticated long much ago smaller by Native and
COMMENTS: This seeds is the of wild sunflowers taste as good as their cultivated seed-eating relatives but insects. are
therefore Americans. more The labor-intensive to utilize. They are also often plagued by
mm 0 1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED Yellow jewelweed flowers. Orange jewelweed pods. Jewelweed seeds 3 Sunflower 3 Helianthus annuus + Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK CHECK: Tall, stout plant with spreading branches and large, rough, heart-shaped leaves; sunflowers with yellow rays and dark disks. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Large, widely-branching annual. Stems coarse, stout, 2-7' (60-210 cm) tall and up to 1.2" (3 cm) thick, solid, aromatic, with a few large ascending branches. The surface is tacky, rough-hairy with hairs both long and short, purple and green mottled, with many small ridges and a few larger grooves. Leaves mostly alternate (lower ones Much more paired), broadly triangular, ovate or heart-shaped, blunt-tipped, to 12" (30 cm) long and common in the almost as broad. Blades rough-hairy, especially beneath and on veins, with 2 prominent, western half of light-colored, arching secondary veins from the base. Veins faintly depressed above. the range. Margins irregularly large-toothed, wavy, or sometimes entire. Petioles 40-100% of blade length, channeled, rough-hairy. Inflorescence solitary, nodding composite heads, on peduncles 6-15" (15-38 cm) long, 3-23 per plant. Heads (mid summer to fall) 2-4.6" (5-12 cm) across, bearing numerous bracts with acuminate tips. The disk is brown, nearly flat to convex, 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) across. Ray florets are about 1" (2.5 cm) long and bright yellow. Seeds resemble those of domestic sunflowers but are smaller and narrower. CONFUSING PLANTS: There are many other native sunflowers, but they tend to have narrower leaves, smaller heads, and/or yellow disks. The seeds of all are safe to eat. HABITAT: Dry, sunny, disturbed ground, especially along highways, ravines, and river floodplains; most common in the Great Plains. Native. Gather seedheads in late summer as they ripen. You'll know they are ripe because the dry florets the FOOD USE: the seeds, when vigorously rubbed, will detach from the receptacle. Once cooked. separated, Conservation 1. seeds, will fall then off and rub them to loosen the hulls and winnow. Flower buds can also be eaten ancestor of the cultivated sunflower, which was domesticated long much ago smaller by Native and COMMENTS: This seeds is the of wild sunflowers taste as good as their cultivated seed-eating relatives but insects. are therefore Americans. more The labor-intensive to utilize. They are also often plagued by 