BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES
2
Jewelweed Impatiens 1 family Balsaminaceae
QUICK genus CHECK: Translucent, tubular, succulent, yellow hollow or orange stems flowers. and thin ID difficulty leaves with 1. sparse, half.
needle-like teeth; Erect irregular, annuals 2-6' (60-180 cm) tall, succulent, branching only thick in in the proportion upper above to
Stem DESCRIPTION: smooth, hairless, at branch hollow, junctures, roundish, often translucent, reddish at hairless, the base pale but beneath, light green ovate to
Composite
its height, bulged (2.5-10 cm) long, The first few
range.
that. elliptic, Leaves the base very broadly thin and angled soft, 1-4" and the tip leaves blunt with are alternate. an extending Midvein claw. purple to pale
the and sets leaf slightly of leaves tip and depressed with on terminating seedlings a downturned above. are near Secondary paired; claw. the notch There later veins between are 1-6 are tooth-like several, two Petioles teeth. flat appendages Margins to hairless, faintly sparsely at depressed thin, the elliptic leaf serrated base. above, to D-shaped Cotyledon with arching large, in toward leaves cross blunt
teeth tipped few weeks. progressively shorten.
are very thick and succulent Lower and petioles persist are for up a to 120% of blade length; rolls ascending off-hence they the name jewelweed.
section-not channeled. into silvery droplets and cloudy weather.
When water falls onto the leaves it beads sunlight, up only to absorb water and recover at night or in (mid late
The plants often wilt severely clusters in bright of 2-4, the flowers hanging on long, thin pedicels. and Flowers two hanging to petals sum- side
Inflorescence 1" spreading cm) long, irregularly shaped, with one hood-like petal above on the narrow end of this
mer) about (2.5 the flower is an enlarged, cone-shaped, sac-like sepal, and 5-sided,
by side. In the that rear curls of back toward the front (I. capensis) or downward (1. pallida). Fruit a green, the seeds.
somewhat cone is a spur banana-shaped capsule, under tension when ripe and exploding upon contact to expel
Seeds elliptic and dark, somewhat flattened, about 4 mm long.
SPECIES: Common jewelweed 1. capensis has an orange flower mottled with dark reddish-brown. Yellow
jewelweed I. pallida has light yellow flowers that are sometimes mottled with reddish. Both are widespread,
common, and native.
HABITAT: Moist, rich, bare soil high in organic matter, most often in moderate shade. Shores and banks,
especially where debris is piled; pond edges, low spots in woods, ravines, streamsides, seepage areas. Native.
FOOD USE: Cotyledon leaves of new seedlings can be nibbled raw or eaten cooked. Very young plants, gener-
ally 6-10" (15-25 cm) tall or less with the leaves still paired, make decent greens after boiling and discarding
the water. The ripe seeds, in late summer, taste like slightly bitter walnuts but are hard to collect in volume.
Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: Best known as a cure or preventive for poison ivy-the juice is rubbed on the affected area after
exposure to prevent the rash from forming. I cannot vouch for its effectiveness, but many people swear by
it. Jewelweed reduces its energy needs by producing very little cellulose and having very thin leaves, instead
holding itself rigid with water pressure. This allows it to thrive in deep shade, but only where there is ample
soil moisture. (Images continued on the next page.)
602
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES 2 Jewelweed Impatiens 1 family Balsaminaceae QUICK genus CHECK: Translucent, tubular, succulent, yellow hollow or orange stems flowers. and thin ID difficulty leaves with 1. sparse, half. needle-like teeth; Erect irregular, annuals 2-6' (60-180 cm) tall, succulent, branching only thick in in the proportion upper above to Stem DESCRIPTION: smooth, hairless, at branch hollow, junctures, roundish, often translucent, reddish at hairless, the base pale but beneath, light green ovate to Composite its height, bulged (2.5-10 cm) long, The first few range. that. elliptic, Leaves the base very broadly thin and angled soft, 1-4" and the tip leaves blunt with are alternate. an extending Midvein claw. purple to pale the and sets leaf slightly of leaves tip and depressed with on terminating seedlings a downturned above. are near Secondary paired; claw. the notch There later veins between are 1-6 are tooth-like several, two Petioles teeth. flat appendages Margins to hairless, faintly sparsely at depressed thin, the elliptic leaf serrated base. above, to D-shaped Cotyledon with arching large, in toward leaves cross blunt teeth tipped few weeks. progressively shorten. are very thick and succulent Lower and petioles persist are for up a to 120% of blade length; rolls ascending off-hence they the name jewelweed. section-not channeled. into silvery droplets and cloudy weather. When water falls onto the leaves it beads sunlight, up only to absorb water and recover at night or in (mid late The plants often wilt severely clusters in bright of 2-4, the flowers hanging on long, thin pedicels. and Flowers two hanging to petals sum- side Inflorescence 1" spreading cm) long, irregularly shaped, with one hood-like petal above on the narrow end of this mer) about (2.5 the flower is an enlarged, cone-shaped, sac-like sepal, and 5-sided, by side. In the that rear curls of back toward the front (I. capensis) or downward (1. pallida). Fruit a green, the seeds. somewhat cone is a spur banana-shaped capsule, under tension when ripe and exploding upon contact to expel Seeds elliptic and dark, somewhat flattened, about 4 mm long. SPECIES: Common jewelweed 1. capensis has an orange flower mottled with dark reddish-brown. Yellow jewelweed I. pallida has light yellow flowers that are sometimes mottled with reddish. Both are widespread, common, and native. HABITAT: Moist, rich, bare soil high in organic matter, most often in moderate shade. Shores and banks, especially where debris is piled; pond edges, low spots in woods, ravines, streamsides, seepage areas. Native. FOOD USE: Cotyledon leaves of new seedlings can be nibbled raw or eaten cooked. Very young plants, gener- ally 6-10" (15-25 cm) tall or less with the leaves still paired, make decent greens after boiling and discarding the water. The ripe seeds, in late summer, taste like slightly bitter walnuts but are hard to collect in volume. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: Best known as a cure or preventive for poison ivy-the juice is rubbed on the affected area after exposure to prevent the rash from forming. I cannot vouch for its effectiveness, but many people swear by it. Jewelweed reduces its energy needs by producing very little cellulose and having very thin leaves, instead holding itself rigid with water pressure. This allows it to thrive in deep shade, but only where there is ample soil moisture. (Images continued on the next page.) 602 