BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
5 Prickly sida
2
D
Sida spinosa Malvaceae (Mallow family)
QUICK major veins; CHECK: Thin-stemmed plant with round-toothed leaves with
ID difficulty 2. half-hidden flowers with 5 yellowish petals oriented counter-clockwise. deeply depressed
DESCRIPTION: Warm-weather annual. Stems 10-40" (25-100 cm) tall and
thick, hairs. branching occasionally, rounded, solid, the surface with clumps of soft, 2-6 mm
Leaves alternate, 0.8-2" (2-5 cm) long, narrowly ovate to narrowly elliptic, radiating the base
when rounded to slightly heart-shaped, the tip blunt or rounded, the blade usually folded at the midvein (especially
new). The upper surface is hairless or nearly so; the underside is faintly hairy. Midvein and secondary
veins deeply depressed above, not offset by color. Margins have sparse, short hairs and are regularly toothed,
the teeth blunt to rounded and large, often with a darkened, maroon tip. Petioles 20-100% of blade length
(shorter near the flowers), faintly hairy and faintly channeled. Stipules 5-8 mm, linear; there is usually a short
spine or bump below the node. Inflorescence solitary or small clumps from leaf axils, the peduncies 10-15 mm
long. Flowers (mid summer to fall) open late on sunny mornings, often half-hidden by leaves, 7-9 mm across.
Flower buds are distinctly winged. Sepals 5, broadly triangular, green. Petals 5, asymmetrical and often wavy,
oriented counter-clockwise and giving the impression of a fan, pale-yellow to creamy, darker and often orange
at the base. Fruits 4-7 mm across, wheel-like with 5 sections.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Sida rhombifolia is a relative that has broader leaves and lacks the spine below the
node. I have not eaten it, but presume it safe to consume in small amounts, since it traditionally has numerous
medicinal uses and is sold commercially as a therapeutic herb.
HABITAT: Rich, loose, disturbed soil in full sun: fields, roadsides, gardens, vacant lots, prairies. Native.
FOOD USE: The tender leaves of young plants make a nice green raw or cooked. Older leaves are sometimes
used for tea.
WARNING: The plant contains ephedrine, a stimulant, 50 it should be consumed in moderation; avoid it IT
ephedrine is contraindicated for you. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: In my limited sampling of this common weed I have enjoyed the young greens, but 1 cannot
vouch for the edibility of other members of this genus. The plant is not prickly when young-the "spine" is an
innocuous spur under the nodes. AKA Prickly fanpetals.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 5 Prickly sida 2 D Sida spinosa Malvaceae (Mallow family) QUICK major veins; CHECK: Thin-stemmed plant with round-toothed leaves with ID difficulty 2. half-hidden flowers with 5 yellowish petals oriented counter-clockwise. deeply depressed DESCRIPTION: Warm-weather annual. Stems 10-40" (25-100 cm) tall and thick, hairs. branching occasionally, rounded, solid, the surface with clumps of soft, 2-6 mm Leaves alternate, 0.8-2" (2-5 cm) long, narrowly ovate to narrowly elliptic, radiating the base when rounded to slightly heart-shaped, the tip blunt or rounded, the blade usually folded at the midvein (especially new). The upper surface is hairless or nearly so; the underside is faintly hairy. Midvein and secondary veins deeply depressed above, not offset by color. Margins have sparse, short hairs and are regularly toothed, the teeth blunt to rounded and large, often with a darkened, maroon tip. Petioles 20-100% of blade length (shorter near the flowers), faintly hairy and faintly channeled. Stipules 5-8 mm, linear; there is usually a short spine or bump below the node. Inflorescence solitary or small clumps from leaf axils, the peduncies 10-15 mm long. Flowers (mid summer to fall) open late on sunny mornings, often half-hidden by leaves, 7-9 mm across. Flower buds are distinctly winged. Sepals 5, broadly triangular, green. Petals 5, asymmetrical and often wavy, oriented counter-clockwise and giving the impression of a fan, pale-yellow to creamy, darker and often orange at the base. Fruits 4-7 mm across, wheel-like with 5 sections. CONFUSING PLANTS: Sida rhombifolia is a relative that has broader leaves and lacks the spine below the node. I have not eaten it, but presume it safe to consume in small amounts, since it traditionally has numerous medicinal uses and is sold commercially as a therapeutic herb. HABITAT: Rich, loose, disturbed soil in full sun: fields, roadsides, gardens, vacant lots, prairies. Native. FOOD USE: The tender leaves of young plants make a nice green raw or cooked. Older leaves are sometimes used for tea. WARNING: The plant contains ephedrine, a stimulant, 50 it should be consumed in moderation; avoid it IT ephedrine is contraindicated for you. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: In my limited sampling of this common weed I have enjoyed the young greens, but 1 cannot vouch for the edibility of other members of this genus. The plant is not prickly when young-the "spine" is an innocuous spur under the nodes. AKA Prickly fanpetals. 