BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
Velvetleaf
Malvaceae
(Mallow
family)
Abutilon theophrasti sparse, drooping, velvety, heart-shaped capsules. leaves
on QUICK long CHECK: petioles; Tall vellow plant flowers with large, and ridged, beaked, bowi-shaped brown
ID difficulty 1. annual, the form taller than wide. Stem single, erect, 3-7' with (90-210 fibrous cm)
tall and up 0.7" thick strips when mature. Branches few, minor, slightly long, drooping
DESCRIPTION: to Large (18 mm) thick, rounded, solid, densely soft-hairy, zigzag, ascending.
bark that peels in broadly heart-shaped with an acuminate tip, 3-8" (8-20 covered with
Most abundant
Leaves alternate, the petiole, folding up at night. Both surfaces are densely Veins and
in the Corn Belt.
short, soft hair (velvet). above and protruding below. Margin has widely and irregularly from spaced small leaf teeth. axils
at a right angle to Beside the midvein are 4-6 major veins from the base.
veinlets are depressed of blade length, not channeled, straight. Flowers (late summer) single upper slightly longer
Petiole 70-100% about 1" (2.5 cm) long. Sepals 5, light green, broadly triangular, velvety. Petals 5. at the
than on pedicels the sepals, spreading o.6-o.8" (15-20 mm) across, orange-yellow, broad and flat or truncated the tip.
Sexual parts are yellow. Fruit roughly bowl-shaped, green at first turning dark gray-brown at maturity,
base rounded and the tip flat, 0.8" (2 cm) across, divided into 10-15 keeled sections, each with a hooked beak
and containing several seeds. Seeds about 3 mm long, dark gray and rough, shaped like a lopsided kidney if
you tried to press the ends together.
HABITAT: Disturbed rich soil in full sun. A weed of crop field, gardens, construction sites, etc. Introduced.
FOOD USE: The youngest leaves can be eaten cooked but are pretty lame; there is usually something better
nearby. The tender stem tips can be peeled and eaten; they have an odd musky flavor. Unripe seeds can be
taken out of the green pods and eaten raw.
Ripe seeds can be soaked or briefly boiled,
drained, and then ground up for a flour or
gruel. They can also be pressed for oil.
COMMENTS: This plant is very easy to rec-
ognize and does not resemble much else. It
is one of the less culinarily useful members
of the mallow family. I helped make the oil
once and it was oily. I liked it. The seeds
can remain viable in the soil for decades.
Velvetleaf has been grown for millennia as a
bast fiber crop; its widespread introduction
to North America was likely for this purpose,
but such use has been mostly abandoned.
Regarding natural toilet paper, velvetleaf is
way, way up there,
Tender tip.
604
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED Velvetleaf Malvaceae (Mallow family) Abutilon theophrasti sparse, drooping, velvety, heart-shaped capsules. leaves on QUICK long CHECK: petioles; Tall vellow plant flowers with large, and ridged, beaked, bowi-shaped brown ID difficulty 1. annual, the form taller than wide. Stem single, erect, 3-7' with (90-210 fibrous cm) tall and up 0.7" thick strips when mature. Branches few, minor, slightly long, drooping DESCRIPTION: to Large (18 mm) thick, rounded, solid, densely soft-hairy, zigzag, ascending. bark that peels in broadly heart-shaped with an acuminate tip, 3-8" (8-20 covered with Most abundant Leaves alternate, the petiole, folding up at night. Both surfaces are densely Veins and in the Corn Belt. short, soft hair (velvet). above and protruding below. Margin has widely and irregularly from spaced small leaf teeth. axils at a right angle to Beside the midvein are 4-6 major veins from the base. veinlets are depressed of blade length, not channeled, straight. Flowers (late summer) single upper slightly longer Petiole 70-100% about 1" (2.5 cm) long. Sepals 5, light green, broadly triangular, velvety. Petals 5. at the than on pedicels the sepals, spreading o.6-o.8" (15-20 mm) across, orange-yellow, broad and flat or truncated the tip. Sexual parts are yellow. Fruit roughly bowl-shaped, green at first turning dark gray-brown at maturity, base rounded and the tip flat, 0.8" (2 cm) across, divided into 10-15 keeled sections, each with a hooked beak and containing several seeds. Seeds about 3 mm long, dark gray and rough, shaped like a lopsided kidney if you tried to press the ends together. HABITAT: Disturbed rich soil in full sun. A weed of crop field, gardens, construction sites, etc. Introduced. FOOD USE: The youngest leaves can be eaten cooked but are pretty lame; there is usually something better nearby. The tender stem tips can be peeled and eaten; they have an odd musky flavor. Unripe seeds can be taken out of the green pods and eaten raw. Ripe seeds can be soaked or briefly boiled, drained, and then ground up for a flour or gruel. They can also be pressed for oil. COMMENTS: This plant is very easy to rec- ognize and does not resemble much else. It is one of the less culinarily useful members of the mallow family. I helped make the oil once and it was oily. I liked it. The seeds can remain viable in the soil for decades. Velvetleaf has been grown for millennia as a bast fiber crop; its widespread introduction to North America was likely for this purpose, but such use has been mostly abandoned. Regarding natural toilet paper, velvetleaf is way, way up there, Tender tip. 604 