BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
Black nightshade
3
3 a NG-375
G
Solanum nigrum (species complex)
Solanaceae (Nightshade family)
Widely branching stems with ridges from the nodes, leaves ID difficulty with a few 2.
blunt QUICK teeth, CHECK: white flowers, and spherical, pea-sized black fruit in clusters.
Annual (rarely perennial in warm climates), wide-spreading and often branchy, resting
to DESCRIPTION: (1m) tall and spreading up to 5) (1.5 m) wide, weakly erect, the branches Shoots often
40" the ground. Stems to 0.6" (15 mm) thick, solid, dull green, gently angled. less promi-
have a short, older stems. The surface ranges from hairless to moderately hairy; if present the hairs are ovate leaning
on wing-like ridge extending down from each node, but these are
and nent tapered, on and those on the ridges may be stout. Leaves alternate, 2-4" (5-10 cm) long, roughly hairless or
diamond-shaped, the bases broad but often decurrent, the tips acutely angled and blunt. Blades to
moderately hairy, often with holes in them (from insects). Midvein slightly depressed. Secondary veins 4-5
per side, broadly angled, moderately depressed, as are the veinlets. Margins rarely entire or wavy, but most
often irregularly and shallowly toothed, the tooth tips blunt or rounded. Often there are a few teeth between
the base and the midpoint, but none distally. Petioles 20-60% of blade length, generally flat on top, but with
a decurrent wing gradually tapering down from the blade; near the base the petiole usually has a light green
center with a thin, dark green wing channel. Inflorescence an umbel or very short raceme (the rachis shorter
than individual pedicels) containing 2-12 flowers, the peduncle and pedicels rounded, the pedicels variable
in length and thickening before the fruit. Flowers (summer through fall) 8-11 mm across. Calyx green with
5 blunt triangular lobes much shorter than the petals. Corolla fused and greenish at the base with 5 reflexed,
white, triangular lobes, each with a depressed central vein. Robust yellow stamens are pressed together in
the center, mostly hiding the pistil. Berries spherical, 5-8 mm, green at first but ripening to dark purple-black,
soft and juicy when ripe with numerous tiny, soft seeds.
SPECIES: This is a "species complex"-it was once considered a single species but closer observation has
revealed multiple, distinct genetic groups within that population. Whether these segregates should be con-
sidered species, subspecies, or (in some cases) chromosome abnormalities is debated. The black nightshades
used to all be lumped under Solanum nigrum-but now more than two dozen very similar species are recognized
worldwide, at least 4 of which are regularly found in our region. The leaves of our native plants often have
faces coppery sheen on the lower surface when young, the flower clusters are umbels, and the leaf and stem a
established are sparsely hairy to hairless. S. nigrum in the stricter sense is the European species, only sur-
species in our in area North are America. edible. It is soft-hairy with slightly elongated flower/fruit clusters (racemes). occasionally All the
CONFUSING PLANTS: Garden tomatil-
los are similar in form and may be easily
confused before fruiting; their greens are
606
Tender young greens.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED Black nightshade 3 3 a NG-375 G Solanum nigrum (species complex) Solanaceae (Nightshade family) Widely branching stems with ridges from the nodes, leaves ID difficulty with a few 2. blunt QUICK teeth, CHECK: white flowers, and spherical, pea-sized black fruit in clusters. Annual (rarely perennial in warm climates), wide-spreading and often branchy, resting to DESCRIPTION: (1m) tall and spreading up to 5) (1.5 m) wide, weakly erect, the branches Shoots often 40" the ground. Stems to 0.6" (15 mm) thick, solid, dull green, gently angled. less promi- have a short, older stems. The surface ranges from hairless to moderately hairy; if present the hairs are ovate leaning on wing-like ridge extending down from each node, but these are and nent tapered, on and those on the ridges may be stout. Leaves alternate, 2-4" (5-10 cm) long, roughly hairless or diamond-shaped, the bases broad but often decurrent, the tips acutely angled and blunt. Blades to moderately hairy, often with holes in them (from insects). Midvein slightly depressed. Secondary veins 4-5 per side, broadly angled, moderately depressed, as are the veinlets. Margins rarely entire or wavy, but most often irregularly and shallowly toothed, the tooth tips blunt or rounded. Often there are a few teeth between the base and the midpoint, but none distally. Petioles 20-60% of blade length, generally flat on top, but with a decurrent wing gradually tapering down from the blade; near the base the petiole usually has a light green center with a thin, dark green wing channel. Inflorescence an umbel or very short raceme (the rachis shorter than individual pedicels) containing 2-12 flowers, the peduncle and pedicels rounded, the pedicels variable in length and thickening before the fruit. Flowers (summer through fall) 8-11 mm across. Calyx green with 5 blunt triangular lobes much shorter than the petals. Corolla fused and greenish at the base with 5 reflexed, white, triangular lobes, each with a depressed central vein. Robust yellow stamens are pressed together in the center, mostly hiding the pistil. Berries spherical, 5-8 mm, green at first but ripening to dark purple-black, soft and juicy when ripe with numerous tiny, soft seeds. SPECIES: This is a "species complex"-it was once considered a single species but closer observation has revealed multiple, distinct genetic groups within that population. Whether these segregates should be con- sidered species, subspecies, or (in some cases) chromosome abnormalities is debated. The black nightshades used to all be lumped under Solanum nigrum-but now more than two dozen very similar species are recognized worldwide, at least 4 of which are regularly found in our region. The leaves of our native plants often have faces coppery sheen on the lower surface when young, the flower clusters are umbels, and the leaf and stem a established are sparsely hairy to hairless. S. nigrum in the stricter sense is the European species, only sur- species in our in area North are America. edible. It is soft-hairy with slightly elongated flower/fruit clusters (racemes). occasionally All the CONFUSING PLANTS: Garden tomatil- los are similar in form and may be easily confused before fruiting; their greens are 606 Tender young greens. 