bitter and probably should not be eaten. Belladonna Atropa belladonna has much larger, poisonous fruit, borne
singly, with a very large calyx under the berry.
HABITAT: Weedy habitats: gardens, yards, building sites, agricultural fields, disturbed soil, rubbish piles.
Also found in wilder landscapes along river banks and in hardwood forests after fires, logging, or windstorms.
Native, although the European species is established in a few areas.
FOOD USE: Tender young stem tips and attached leaves, before the flowers open, make excellent greens
but should be steamed or boiled; older leaves are bitter and mildly toxic. Ripe fruit, dark purple-black and
juicy, is eaten out of hand or used in salads, salsa, pies, jams, burritos, and applesauce, from midsummer
through fall. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This plant is the subject of the most pervasive myth of toxicity of any in North America. Both
ignorance and racism have fed that myth. Doctors are not botanists-I have examined several documented
poisonings from "Solanum nigrum" that were clearly and unambiguously misidentified Atropa belladonna.
The two plants are easily distinguished. The ripe berries of the S. nigrum complex are enjoyed by hundreds
of millions of people worldwide, and the greens are among the most commonly eaten leafy vegetables in the
world. Nevertheless, many Europeans have asserted for centuries that this plant is poisonous, despite ample
living proof that this is nonsense.
7 Ground-cherry
1-3
Physalis spp.
Solanaceae (Nightshade family)
QUICK CHECK: Low plant with spreading branches, zigzag stems, and hanging, spheri-
cal fruit enclosed in a loose, 5-part, papery husk. ID difficulty 1.
Perennials usually knee-high or shorter, spreading and widely the branched, lower part the
DESCRIPTION: limbs of large plants sometimes resting on the ground. Stems single, before erect branching, in ridged,
often with small wings on
Collective
the ridges, solid, usually
range of genus
hairy. Leaves alternate or
Physalis.
in unequal, non-opposing
pairs, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, narrowly elliptic
or lanceolate to ovate, with the base tapered
to broadly angled, the tip tapered or acutely
angled with a blunt tip. Blades may be hairless
or hairy. Veins and veinlets are depressed
above and protrude below. Margins most
often have a few large, blunt teeth (lacking
claws or nipples), but sometimes are wavy
entire. Petioles 20-40% of blade length,
channeled. or (Continued on the next page.)
Physalis longifolia.
607
bitter and probably should not be eaten. Belladonna Atropa belladonna has much larger, poisonous fruit, borne singly, with a very large calyx under the berry. HABITAT: Weedy habitats: gardens, yards, building sites, agricultural fields, disturbed soil, rubbish piles. Also found in wilder landscapes along river banks and in hardwood forests after fires, logging, or windstorms. Native, although the European species is established in a few areas. FOOD USE: Tender young stem tips and attached leaves, before the flowers open, make excellent greens but should be steamed or boiled; older leaves are bitter and mildly toxic. Ripe fruit, dark purple-black and juicy, is eaten out of hand or used in salads, salsa, pies, jams, burritos, and applesauce, from midsummer through fall. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This plant is the subject of the most pervasive myth of toxicity of any in North America. Both ignorance and racism have fed that myth. Doctors are not botanists-I have examined several documented poisonings from "Solanum nigrum" that were clearly and unambiguously misidentified Atropa belladonna. The two plants are easily distinguished. The ripe berries of the S. nigrum complex are enjoyed by hundreds of millions of people worldwide, and the greens are among the most commonly eaten leafy vegetables in the world. Nevertheless, many Europeans have asserted for centuries that this plant is poisonous, despite ample living proof that this is nonsense. 7 Ground-cherry 1-3 Physalis spp. Solanaceae (Nightshade family) QUICK CHECK: Low plant with spreading branches, zigzag stems, and hanging, spheri- cal fruit enclosed in a loose, 5-part, papery husk. ID difficulty 1. Perennials usually knee-high or shorter, spreading and widely the branched, lower part the DESCRIPTION: limbs of large plants sometimes resting on the ground. Stems single, before erect branching, in ridged, often with small wings on Collective the ridges, solid, usually range of genus hairy. Leaves alternate or Physalis. in unequal, non-opposing pairs, 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long, narrowly elliptic or lanceolate to ovate, with the base tapered to broadly angled, the tip tapered or acutely angled with a blunt tip. Blades may be hairless or hairy. Veins and veinlets are depressed above and protrude below. Margins most often have a few large, blunt teeth (lacking claws or nipples), but sometimes are wavy entire. Petioles 20-40% of blade length, channeled. or (Continued on the next page.) Physalis longifolia. 607 