BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
Ground-cherry (continued)
i toward the ground, hanging wide-spreading on long pedicels bell from of five leaf fused axils.
Flowers (mid to late summer) triangular single, lobes open fused at the base. Corolla like a Fruit (late summer through fall)
Calyx 5 pointed, like green, a sloppy pentagon from the end, yellow on most species. a inflated, papery husk, the
petals, looking berry 0.3-0.7" (8-18 mm) in diameter, enclosed in often 5-part, with a sticky surface. Inside
berry a tomato-like ripening spherical dull yellow to orange, straw, or occasionally purple-black,
are numerous tiny, soft seeds.
HABITAT: Open, sunny, dry ground, especially well-drained sand or gravel: prairies, streambanks, savannahs, disturbed woodland
openings, roadsides, meadows, fields, pastures, building sites, empty lots, dry
ground. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather papery husks from the plant or off the ground beneath it in late summer or fall. After
removing the husks the ripe fruit can be eaten raw as a snack, added to salads or burritos, or made into jam,
pie or sauces. They can also be dried. Unripe fruit is usually bitter. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: These delicious fruits are often produced sparingly, but when you can find enough, wonderful
things can be made from them. The cultivated tomatillo is a member of the same genus.
SPECIES: There are numerous ground cherries native in our region; the four most common are pictured here.
Of these, clammy ground-cherry P. heterophylla has the best-tasting and largest fruit. This species can be
identified by its broad leaves and the fact that all parts are densely covered with soft but sticky, erect hairs.
Virginia ground-cherry P. virginiana has narrower leaves and is less hairy; its fruit ripens to a deeper orange,
and the stem end of the husk is deeply depressed. Long-leaved ground-cherry P. longifolia has few to no hairs.
The leaves are really no narrower than those of Virginia ground-cherry, but the fruit husk is more rounded on
top. A common species across the South is cut-leaf
ground-cherry P. angulata (another misnomer, for
this one has large teeth, but the leaves are not deeply
cut). This annual has fruit that is not quite as good
as the perennials mentioned above.
Physicia ungulate
Physalis virginiana.
(above and below) Physalis heterophylla.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED Ground-cherry (continued) i toward the ground, hanging wide-spreading on long pedicels bell from of five leaf fused axils. Flowers (mid to late summer) triangular single, lobes open fused at the base. Corolla like a Fruit (late summer through fall) Calyx 5 pointed, like green, a sloppy pentagon from the end, yellow on most species. a inflated, papery husk, the petals, looking berry 0.3-0.7" (8-18 mm) in diameter, enclosed in often 5-part, with a sticky surface. Inside berry a tomato-like ripening spherical dull yellow to orange, straw, or occasionally purple-black, are numerous tiny, soft seeds. HABITAT: Open, sunny, dry ground, especially well-drained sand or gravel: prairies, streambanks, savannahs, disturbed woodland openings, roadsides, meadows, fields, pastures, building sites, empty lots, dry ground. Native. FOOD USE: Gather papery husks from the plant or off the ground beneath it in late summer or fall. After removing the husks the ripe fruit can be eaten raw as a snack, added to salads or burritos, or made into jam, pie or sauces. They can also be dried. Unripe fruit is usually bitter. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: These delicious fruits are often produced sparingly, but when you can find enough, wonderful things can be made from them. The cultivated tomatillo is a member of the same genus. SPECIES: There are numerous ground cherries native in our region; the four most common are pictured here. Of these, clammy ground-cherry P. heterophylla has the best-tasting and largest fruit. This species can be identified by its broad leaves and the fact that all parts are densely covered with soft but sticky, erect hairs. Virginia ground-cherry P. virginiana has narrower leaves and is less hairy; its fruit ripens to a deeper orange, and the stem end of the husk is deeply depressed. Long-leaved ground-cherry P. longifolia has few to no hairs. The leaves are really no narrower than those of Virginia ground-cherry, but the fruit husk is more rounded on top. A common species across the South is cut-leaf ground-cherry P. angulata (another misnomer, for this one has large teeth, but the leaves are not deeply cut). This annual has fruit that is not quite as good as the perennials mentioned above. Physicia ungulate Physalis virginiana. (above and below) Physalis heterophylla. 