ABSENT,
LEAVES
ALTERNATE,
TOOTHED
8
Wood nettle
3
3
2
FH-177
Laportea canadensis
Urticaceae (Nettle family)
QUICK CHECK: Broad, pointed, alternate leaves on long petioles concentrated
the top of erect stems armed with many long stingers; flowers unshowy. ID difficulty near 2.
DESCRIPTION: Erect perennial spreading by rhizome, often forming extensive colo-
nies. Stems 2-6' (60-180 cm) tall, solid, round below but with smooth-topped ridges in
the upper part, green, zigzag (especially in the upper half), covered with erect stinging
hairs, unbranched or branching minimally and only near the top. Leaves alternate, 6-14
per stalk, 2-8" (5-20 cm) long and almost as wide, heart-shaped or broadly ovate to
nearly round with acuminate tips. Both sides have erect, stiff hairs and stingers-the latter especially along
the veins. Midvein narrow, green, and depressed above. Secondary veins 5-6 per side, 2 major ones arising
at the base, depressed above. as are the veinlets. Margins serrated, the teeth large and evenly spaced and
sized. Petioles 70-110% of blade length, grooved, bearing stingers.
Inflorescence leafless panicles, the male and female separate on
the same plant. Female: flat-topped, spreading panicle of hundreds
at the plant's apex. Male: spreading to ascending smaller panicles
from leaf axils. Flowers of both genders tiny and unshowy in mid
summer. Female a drooping tiny leaflike structure with a few sexual
strands curving above it; the panicle branches persist, becoming
wide and flat. Male 5 tiny, widely-separated white petals; the
panicle branches wither. Seeds flattened, brown, oval, about the
size of flax seeds, hidden as they dangle beneath the panicles in
late summer or early autumn.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Often confused with stinging nettle, for
which I accept no excuse.
HABITAT: Rich, moist, but not permanently wet soil in full to
partial shade, on sites where periodic disturbance leaves bare soil.
Most abundant and largest in river floodplains; also in hardwood
forests on steep slopes and along trails and dirt roads. Native.
FOOD USE: Harvest shoots in mid spring while the leaves have
scarcely unfurled; eat cooked. A little later in the season collect
the tender leafy tops and boil or steam as a potherb. By the time
the leaves unfurl the stingers may be very potent, so wear gloves
when collecting greens. Ripe seeds can be collected in autumn
and cooked like flax seeds. Conservation 2/1.
COMMENTS: Not as well-known as stinging nettle (probably me)
because it is absent from Europe), many people consider (including wood
nettle a bet-
ter food plant.
This is one of
the best of all
green vegeta-
bles. Not only
does it have
flax-like seeds,
but the stem
fibers are very
similar and have
been used like
linen for mak-
ing nets, ropes
and cloth
(top) Wood nettle flowering (bottom left) Shoots
609
(bottom right) Inflorescence
ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 8 Wood nettle 3 3 2 FH-177 Laportea canadensis Urticaceae (Nettle family) QUICK CHECK: Broad, pointed, alternate leaves on long petioles concentrated the top of erect stems armed with many long stingers; flowers unshowy. ID difficulty near 2. DESCRIPTION: Erect perennial spreading by rhizome, often forming extensive colo- nies. Stems 2-6' (60-180 cm) tall, solid, round below but with smooth-topped ridges in the upper part, green, zigzag (especially in the upper half), covered with erect stinging hairs, unbranched or branching minimally and only near the top. Leaves alternate, 6-14 per stalk, 2-8" (5-20 cm) long and almost as wide, heart-shaped or broadly ovate to nearly round with acuminate tips. Both sides have erect, stiff hairs and stingers-the latter especially along the veins. Midvein narrow, green, and depressed above. Secondary veins 5-6 per side, 2 major ones arising at the base, depressed above. as are the veinlets. Margins serrated, the teeth large and evenly spaced and sized. Petioles 70-110% of blade length, grooved, bearing stingers. Inflorescence leafless panicles, the male and female separate on the same plant. Female: flat-topped, spreading panicle of hundreds at the plant's apex. Male: spreading to ascending smaller panicles from leaf axils. Flowers of both genders tiny and unshowy in mid summer. Female a drooping tiny leaflike structure with a few sexual strands curving above it; the panicle branches persist, becoming wide and flat. Male 5 tiny, widely-separated white petals; the panicle branches wither. Seeds flattened, brown, oval, about the size of flax seeds, hidden as they dangle beneath the panicles in late summer or early autumn. CONFUSING PLANTS: Often confused with stinging nettle, for which I accept no excuse. HABITAT: Rich, moist, but not permanently wet soil in full to partial shade, on sites where periodic disturbance leaves bare soil. Most abundant and largest in river floodplains; also in hardwood forests on steep slopes and along trails and dirt roads. Native. FOOD USE: Harvest shoots in mid spring while the leaves have scarcely unfurled; eat cooked. A little later in the season collect the tender leafy tops and boil or steam as a potherb. By the time the leaves unfurl the stingers may be very potent, so wear gloves when collecting greens. Ripe seeds can be collected in autumn and cooked like flax seeds. Conservation 2/1. COMMENTS: Not as well-known as stinging nettle (probably me) because it is absent from Europe), many people consider (including wood nettle a bet- ter food plant. This is one of the best of all green vegeta- bles. Not only does it have flax-like seeds, but the stem fibers are very similar and have been used like linen for mak- ing nets, ropes and cloth (top) Wood nettle flowering (bottom left) Shoots 609 (bottom right) Inflorescence 