BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
10 Common goldenrod
2
Solidago canadensis
Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK leaves with CHECK: Colonies of tall, straight stems with numerous narrow,
ID a few scattered teeth; tiny yellow flowerheads in an elongated sessile, panisle pointed
difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial forming clones by rhizome. Stems dense but not clumped,
(1.2-1.8 m) tall, 4-8 mm thick, round, nearly solid but with a pinhole hollow, erect, straight, 4-6
the surface reddish and green, with scattered, short, erect hair (more on the upper stem).
Shoots have crowded lower leaves that may appear basal for a short time after emerging.
Branches many and strongly ascending, but small and only on the upper stalk. Leaves numerous, alternate,
evenly spaced and overlapping along most of the stem, ascending, minutely hairy (more so above). 2-5"
(5-13 cm) long, sessile, with a bump under each node. Blades are elongate-elliptic, tapered at the base and
the pointed tip. Major veins depressed above, protruding below, and hairy on the underside. There are only
two prominent secondary veins, diverging in the lower quarter of the leaf, running parallel to the midvein, and
reconverging at the tip. Margins purplish and hairy with a few widely-spaced, sharp teeth with light-colored,
needle-like tips; the lower 25-40% of the blade is toothless. Branches may have paired leaves. Inflorescence a
panicle of numerous tiny composite heads (late summer to autumn) borne mostly on the upper sides of the
branches, the florets yellow. LYDS persistent.
CONFUSING SPECIES: Giant goldenrod Solidago gigantea is another large, widespread goldenrod that looks
trikingly similar at a glance; it differs in having smooth, glaucous stems. While not dangerous, giant goldenrod
hoots are bitter and disappointing.
ABITAT: Well-drained to moist soil in full sun. Fields, pastures, roadsides, savannahs, floodplains, forest
clearings. Native.
FOOD USE: Lateral shoots in summer are good raw or
cooked. Erect shoots are better peeled or cooked with the
leaves removed. Blanched shoots (do this by placing a piece
of plywood over a colony in spring before they emerge) are
whitish and very tender-much better than the green shoots.
Leaves can be used for tea. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This abundant, beautiful, and well-known
plant is allelopathic-producing chemicals that inhibit the
growth of competing plants. This makes it a strong competi-
tor, excellent at taking over abandoned farmland, where it
often forms large, pure colonies. It is one of the most abun-
dant plants in our region. People like to hate it because it is
so common, but it didn't really do anything wrong. There are
many goldenrods and all are safe to try, but this is one of the
largest, most common, and best-tasting.
(top lett) Solidago canadensis lateral shout
611
(buttom 'eit) Shoot
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 10 Common goldenrod 2 Solidago canadensis Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK leaves with CHECK: Colonies of tall, straight stems with numerous narrow, ID a few scattered teeth; tiny yellow flowerheads in an elongated sessile, panisle pointed difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial forming clones by rhizome. Stems dense but not clumped, (1.2-1.8 m) tall, 4-8 mm thick, round, nearly solid but with a pinhole hollow, erect, straight, 4-6 the surface reddish and green, with scattered, short, erect hair (more on the upper stem). Shoots have crowded lower leaves that may appear basal for a short time after emerging. Branches many and strongly ascending, but small and only on the upper stalk. Leaves numerous, alternate, evenly spaced and overlapping along most of the stem, ascending, minutely hairy (more so above). 2-5" (5-13 cm) long, sessile, with a bump under each node. Blades are elongate-elliptic, tapered at the base and the pointed tip. Major veins depressed above, protruding below, and hairy on the underside. There are only two prominent secondary veins, diverging in the lower quarter of the leaf, running parallel to the midvein, and reconverging at the tip. Margins purplish and hairy with a few widely-spaced, sharp teeth with light-colored, needle-like tips; the lower 25-40% of the blade is toothless. Branches may have paired leaves. Inflorescence a panicle of numerous tiny composite heads (late summer to autumn) borne mostly on the upper sides of the branches, the florets yellow. LYDS persistent. CONFUSING SPECIES: Giant goldenrod Solidago gigantea is another large, widespread goldenrod that looks trikingly similar at a glance; it differs in having smooth, glaucous stems. While not dangerous, giant goldenrod hoots are bitter and disappointing. ABITAT: Well-drained to moist soil in full sun. Fields, pastures, roadsides, savannahs, floodplains, forest clearings. Native. FOOD USE: Lateral shoots in summer are good raw or cooked. Erect shoots are better peeled or cooked with the leaves removed. Blanched shoots (do this by placing a piece of plywood over a colony in spring before they emerge) are whitish and very tender-much better than the green shoots. Leaves can be used for tea. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This abundant, beautiful, and well-known plant is allelopathic-producing chemicals that inhibit the growth of competing plants. This makes it a strong competi- tor, excellent at taking over abandoned farmland, where it often forms large, pure colonies. It is one of the most abun- dant plants in our region. People like to hate it because it is so common, but it didn't really do anything wrong. There are many goldenrods and all are safe to try, but this is one of the largest, most common, and best-tasting. (top lett) Solidago canadensis lateral shout 611 (buttom 'eit) Shoot 