BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
Serrated sage
Artemisia
serrata Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK CHECK: Tall, unbranched plant with numerous long, pointed, sharply-toothed
leaves that are silvery-white on the underside. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by rhizome, sometimes to form large colonies. Stems
erect, straight, to 6' (2 m) tall and 8 mm thick, solid/pithy, roundish but with many small
ridges, bark easily peeling in cord-like strips; mostly unbranched below the inflorescence-
the branches strongly ascending if present. Leaves alternate, crowded, sessile, 3.5-5"
(9-13 cm) long, narrowly lanceolate or elliptic, tapered at the base and the pointed tip. Blades are flat excep
for downcurved margins. The upper surface is hairless and dark green; the lower surface is whitish gray from i
covering of soft, matted hairs. There are numerous secondary veins about 45° to the midvein, these light in color
depressed on the upper surface, protruding below. Margins with long, sharp, widely-spaced, forward-pointing
teeth. Stipules have 1-3 lanceolate lobes, becoming more prominent upward. Inflorescence branchy ascending
panicles of hundreds of small heads on stems of various length, interspersed with reduced leaves. Heads 4-6 mm
long and about 3 mm wide, mostly drooping, with gray-green bracts at the base. Florets few, lacking petals,
a mixture of yellowish and
reddish open florets with
3-5 pale yellow, thread-like
sexual parts protruding.
HABITAT: Sunny open-
ings in floodplains and river
valleys, meadows, marsh
edges, low savannahs,
roadsides-especially on
rich sandy soil. Native.
FOOD USE: The young
leafy tips can be used as an
herb or tea like mugwort.
Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is a
native alternative to mug-
wort, common in many
areas where mugwort is
absent; the flavor is very
similar but slightly milder.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED Serrated sage Artemisia serrata Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK CHECK: Tall, unbranched plant with numerous long, pointed, sharply-toothed leaves that are silvery-white on the underside. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by rhizome, sometimes to form large colonies. Stems erect, straight, to 6' (2 m) tall and 8 mm thick, solid/pithy, roundish but with many small ridges, bark easily peeling in cord-like strips; mostly unbranched below the inflorescence- the branches strongly ascending if present. Leaves alternate, crowded, sessile, 3.5-5" (9-13 cm) long, narrowly lanceolate or elliptic, tapered at the base and the pointed tip. Blades are flat excep for downcurved margins. The upper surface is hairless and dark green; the lower surface is whitish gray from i covering of soft, matted hairs. There are numerous secondary veins about 45° to the midvein, these light in color depressed on the upper surface, protruding below. Margins with long, sharp, widely-spaced, forward-pointing teeth. Stipules have 1-3 lanceolate lobes, becoming more prominent upward. Inflorescence branchy ascending panicles of hundreds of small heads on stems of various length, interspersed with reduced leaves. Heads 4-6 mm long and about 3 mm wide, mostly drooping, with gray-green bracts at the base. Florets few, lacking petals, a mixture of yellowish and reddish open florets with 3-5 pale yellow, thread-like sexual parts protruding. HABITAT: Sunny open- ings in floodplains and river valleys, meadows, marsh edges, low savannahs, roadsides-especially on rich sandy soil. Native. FOOD USE: The young leafy tips can be used as an herb or tea like mugwort. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is a native alternative to mug- wort, common in many areas where mugwort is absent; the flavor is very similar but slightly milder. 