BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
Ditch stonecrop
Penthorum sedoides
family Penthoraceae
CHECK: Thigh high plant of wet soil with ridged stems and thin, alternate, difficulty sharp- 3.
toothed QUICK leaves, and a cluster of one-sided racemes with star-like fruit. ID
DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading short distances by rhizome. Stems to 30" (75 with cm)
tall and 1 cm thick, erect, solid, ridged, the base nearly hairless but the upper part
scattered thin, gland-tipped hairs, especially on the angles. Stems often reddish at maturity
but green when young. Branches ascending, borne occasionally near the base but mostly
near the top. Leaves to 3.5" (9 cm) long, alternate, elliptic to lanceolate, thin, the base
tapered, the tip sharp-pointed, the surface hairless, lighter and glossier below. Lower leaves are borne on
petioles up to 10% of blade length; upper leaves are sessile. Midvein often pink with age; above it protrudes
in a shallow depression. Secondary veins 55-70° to the midvein at first then curving toward the tip, slightly
depressed, regularly spaced and prominent but dividing and becoming faint before reaching the margin. All
veins protrude below. Margins have small, sharp, closely spaced, forward-pointing teeth of variable or alter-
nating size. Inflorescense a branching terminal cluster of multiple ascending racemes, the flowers packed
closely together on very short pedicels, mostly on one side of the curved rachis and oriented toward the
center of the cluster. Flowers 3-6 mm across with 5 narrow, greenish, pointed, spreading sepals. Petals are
usually absent; 5 white, bottle-shaped carpels (pistil bases) are
prominent, surrounded by 10 white stamens. Fruit a star-like,
5-pointed, many-seeded capsule 5-7 mm across that turns red
in autumn; each point ends with a nipple.
HABITAT: Muddy areas with disturbed soil, usually in full sun
or light shade. Riverbanks, puddles on clay soil, ditches, grave!
bars, marshes, pond edges. Native.
FOOD USE: The tender young greens can be collected in early
summer and eaten raw or cooked. They are somewhat astringent
and bitter-the flavor reminds me of brooklime. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This plant is remarkably beautiful when mature;
when young it is nondescript, and thus rarely noticed until mid
to late summer. It is recorded as a traditional Anishinaabe food,
and I've eaten it, but it's not very exciting. Sources say the pet-
but als are "usually absent." I've never seen petals on this plant,
such phrasing suggests that they are sometimes present.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED Ditch stonecrop Penthorum sedoides family Penthoraceae CHECK: Thigh high plant of wet soil with ridged stems and thin, alternate, difficulty sharp- 3. toothed QUICK leaves, and a cluster of one-sided racemes with star-like fruit. ID DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading short distances by rhizome. Stems to 30" (75 with cm) tall and 1 cm thick, erect, solid, ridged, the base nearly hairless but the upper part scattered thin, gland-tipped hairs, especially on the angles. Stems often reddish at maturity but green when young. Branches ascending, borne occasionally near the base but mostly near the top. Leaves to 3.5" (9 cm) long, alternate, elliptic to lanceolate, thin, the base tapered, the tip sharp-pointed, the surface hairless, lighter and glossier below. Lower leaves are borne on petioles up to 10% of blade length; upper leaves are sessile. Midvein often pink with age; above it protrudes in a shallow depression. Secondary veins 55-70° to the midvein at first then curving toward the tip, slightly depressed, regularly spaced and prominent but dividing and becoming faint before reaching the margin. All veins protrude below. Margins have small, sharp, closely spaced, forward-pointing teeth of variable or alter- nating size. Inflorescense a branching terminal cluster of multiple ascending racemes, the flowers packed closely together on very short pedicels, mostly on one side of the curved rachis and oriented toward the center of the cluster. Flowers 3-6 mm across with 5 narrow, greenish, pointed, spreading sepals. Petals are usually absent; 5 white, bottle-shaped carpels (pistil bases) are prominent, surrounded by 10 white stamens. Fruit a star-like, 5-pointed, many-seeded capsule 5-7 mm across that turns red in autumn; each point ends with a nipple. HABITAT: Muddy areas with disturbed soil, usually in full sun or light shade. Riverbanks, puddles on clay soil, ditches, grave! bars, marshes, pond edges. Native. FOOD USE: The tender young greens can be collected in early summer and eaten raw or cooked. They are somewhat astringent and bitter-the flavor reminds me of brooklime. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This plant is remarkably beautiful when mature; when young it is nondescript, and thus rarely noticed until mid to late summer. It is recorded as a traditional Anishinaabe food, and I've eaten it, but it's not very exciting. Sources say the pet- but als are "usually absent." I've never seen petals on this plant, such phrasing suggests that they are sometimes present. 