LITY
-
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
12 Orpine
1
Hylotelephium telephium family Crassulaceae
QUICK leaves. CHECK: Shin-high, clumping succulent with unbranched stems
ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial with tufted stems from a thick root system, forming dense
nies of erect or semi-erect plants 12-30" (30-75 cm) tall. All parts are hairless. Roots short. colo-
stout, strongly tapered, with many bulbous tuber-like attachments. Stems rounded. solid,
succulent, often purplish, unbranched below the inflorescence, naked in the bottom
quarter but with very crowded leaves near the top. LYDS very stiff and tough, bumpy
from numerous raised leaf scars. Leaves alternate, thick and fleshy, 1-3.5" (2.5-9 cm) long, elliptic to ovate
or obovate and blunt at the tip. There is a waxy outer layer that can be rubbed and peeled from the fleshy
inner leaf. Midvein and secondary veins are flat and obscure above. Margins toothed, but not near the base.
Most leaves are sessile, but lower ones may have very short petioles. Stringy bark often remains attached to
a plucked leaf. Inflorescence a tight, spreading, flat-topped to slightly convex, crowded, branching terminal
cluster 2-7" (5-18 across. Flowers 5-9 mm across with 5 pink to purple petals, ovate with an acuminate
tip, the center broad with 5 large compartments (carpels). Fruit is a capsule, rarely formed.
HABITAT: Moderate shade to sun, usually found near old home sites or in meadows, disturbed woods, forest
edges, and parks. Introduced.
FOOD USE: The fleshy leaves are edible raw or cooked, and are best early in the growing season-but in no
Gase are they especially good. The roots are prolific and form a tangled mass under the colony. Harvested
from fall through early spring, they can be eaten as a cooked vegetable, but they taste pretty bad. The young
bots are also sometimes made into pickles.
COMMENTS: The name "live-forever" derives from the fact that severed plants remain green for a very
long time, drawing upon
the water stored in the
succulent flesh. The
plant is erratically dis-
tributed and infrequently
encountered in most re-
gions, but in specific lo-
calities it can be prolific.
AKA live-forever, Sedum
purpureum. S. telephium.
A very similar native spe-
cies, Sedum telephioides,
has a limited distribution
in dry, rocky terrain of the
Appalachians.
(far left) Orpine with
young greens
Related edible:
Roseroot
Sedum
roseum
is a larger plant found on rocky, sunny slopes mostly toothed, near
This coast in eastern Canada. The leaves are scarcely leaves
the the flowers are yellow. This species has edible young Both
and edible rose-scented roots. (I have not tried the roots.) thern
and traditionally fermented and eaten by some medicine. nor
parts are This plant has long been used in traditional commercially in
peoples. and unfor tunately has been heavily harvested
some areas. AKA Rhadiola rosea.
013
LITY - BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 12 Orpine 1 Hylotelephium telephium family Crassulaceae QUICK leaves. CHECK: Shin-high, clumping succulent with unbranched stems ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial with tufted stems from a thick root system, forming dense nies of erect or semi-erect plants 12-30" (30-75 cm) tall. All parts are hairless. Roots short. colo- stout, strongly tapered, with many bulbous tuber-like attachments. Stems rounded. solid, succulent, often purplish, unbranched below the inflorescence, naked in the bottom quarter but with very crowded leaves near the top. LYDS very stiff and tough, bumpy from numerous raised leaf scars. Leaves alternate, thick and fleshy, 1-3.5" (2.5-9 cm) long, elliptic to ovate or obovate and blunt at the tip. There is a waxy outer layer that can be rubbed and peeled from the fleshy inner leaf. Midvein and secondary veins are flat and obscure above. Margins toothed, but not near the base. Most leaves are sessile, but lower ones may have very short petioles. Stringy bark often remains attached to a plucked leaf. Inflorescence a tight, spreading, flat-topped to slightly convex, crowded, branching terminal cluster 2-7" (5-18 across. Flowers 5-9 mm across with 5 pink to purple petals, ovate with an acuminate tip, the center broad with 5 large compartments (carpels). Fruit is a capsule, rarely formed. HABITAT: Moderate shade to sun, usually found near old home sites or in meadows, disturbed woods, forest edges, and parks. Introduced. FOOD USE: The fleshy leaves are edible raw or cooked, and are best early in the growing season-but in no Gase are they especially good. The roots are prolific and form a tangled mass under the colony. Harvested from fall through early spring, they can be eaten as a cooked vegetable, but they taste pretty bad. The young bots are also sometimes made into pickles. COMMENTS: The name "live-forever" derives from the fact that severed plants remain green for a very long time, drawing upon the water stored in the succulent flesh. The plant is erratically dis- tributed and infrequently encountered in most re- gions, but in specific lo- calities it can be prolific. AKA live-forever, Sedum purpureum. S. telephium. A very similar native spe- cies, Sedum telephioides, has a limited distribution in dry, rocky terrain of the Appalachians. (far left) Orpine with young greens Related edible: Roseroot Sedum roseum is a larger plant found on rocky, sunny slopes mostly toothed, near This coast in eastern Canada. The leaves are scarcely leaves the the flowers are yellow. This species has edible young Both and edible rose-scented roots. (I have not tried the roots.) thern and traditionally fermented and eaten by some medicine. nor parts are This plant has long been used in traditional commercially in peoples. and unfor tunately has been heavily harvested some areas. AKA Rhadiola rosea. 013 