Brandifiers
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED
14 Appalachian bellflower
2
Campanula divaricata
family Campanulaceae
QUICK CHECK: Knee-high clumped herb with lax stems and milky sap, narrowly Lare
ceolate leaves with sparse teeth, and drooping blue bell-like flowers on thin branches
ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a taproot. Sap milky. Stems 1-3' (30-90 tall, multiple,
slender, to 4 mm thick, erect to leaning, stiff, zigzag, solid, hairless, with fine wing ridges
running down from the nodes, unbranched at first but branching at blooming in the upper
half. Branches delicate, slightly ascending to spreading, the tips sometimes drooping. Leaves alternate.
sessile (or the lower ones with a taper-winged petiole), 0.8-3" (2-8 cm) long, narrowly lanceolate, tapered
at the base, the tip often curved and very long-tapered to a sharp point. Surfaces hairless on both sides but
minutely granular above. Midvein flat or nearly so above, protruding slightly below. Secondary veins are
faint, flat to faintly protruding above and below, soon breaking up. Veins are as dark or darker than the blade.
Margins sparsely toothed, the teeth large or small, turned outward and nipple-tipped. Inflorescence a loose
leafy panicle composing the top half of the plant, the leaves within it thin and small, the pedicels long, thin,
and single or in small clusters from the axils. Flowers (June-October) blue, bell-shaped, hanging, 7-9 mm
long. Calyx united, green, with 5 linear lobes spreading 90° to the pedicel. Corolla united for about 60% of
its length, the 5 lobes then strongly recurving. Style prominent and blue, protruding by about the length of
the bell, with a light-colored, gradually thickened tip. Fruit a top-shaped capsule with numerous tiny séeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: A goldenrod with very similar form shares its habitat, but has more forward-pointed
teeth on the leaves, and lacks milky sap.
HABITAT: Rocky slopes and outcroppings, usu-
ally in partial sun. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender stem tips make a nice mild
green, raw or cooked, in spring. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: Because this plant is rather slow-
growing it never produces a large tender shoot.
Although easy to identify in bloom, the young
piants are rather non-descript. This species
is sparsely distributed due to its specialized
habitat, SO collect it sparingly.
Brandifiers BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, TOOTHED 14 Appalachian bellflower 2 Campanula divaricata family Campanulaceae QUICK CHECK: Knee-high clumped herb with lax stems and milky sap, narrowly Lare ceolate leaves with sparse teeth, and drooping blue bell-like flowers on thin branches ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a taproot. Sap milky. Stems 1-3' (30-90 tall, multiple, slender, to 4 mm thick, erect to leaning, stiff, zigzag, solid, hairless, with fine wing ridges running down from the nodes, unbranched at first but branching at blooming in the upper half. Branches delicate, slightly ascending to spreading, the tips sometimes drooping. Leaves alternate. sessile (or the lower ones with a taper-winged petiole), 0.8-3" (2-8 cm) long, narrowly lanceolate, tapered at the base, the tip often curved and very long-tapered to a sharp point. Surfaces hairless on both sides but minutely granular above. Midvein flat or nearly so above, protruding slightly below. Secondary veins are faint, flat to faintly protruding above and below, soon breaking up. Veins are as dark or darker than the blade. Margins sparsely toothed, the teeth large or small, turned outward and nipple-tipped. Inflorescence a loose leafy panicle composing the top half of the plant, the leaves within it thin and small, the pedicels long, thin, and single or in small clusters from the axils. Flowers (June-October) blue, bell-shaped, hanging, 7-9 mm long. Calyx united, green, with 5 linear lobes spreading 90° to the pedicel. Corolla united for about 60% of its length, the 5 lobes then strongly recurving. Style prominent and blue, protruding by about the length of the bell, with a light-colored, gradually thickened tip. Fruit a top-shaped capsule with numerous tiny séeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: A goldenrod with very similar form shares its habitat, but has more forward-pointed teeth on the leaves, and lacks milky sap. HABITAT: Rocky slopes and outcroppings, usu- ally in partial sun. Native. FOOD USE: Tender stem tips make a nice mild green, raw or cooked, in spring. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: Because this plant is rather slow- growing it never produces a large tender shoot. Although easy to identify in bloom, the young piants are rather non-descript. This species is sparsely distributed due to its specialized habitat, SO collect it sparingly. 