BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE,
13 Bigfruit evening-primrose
2
2
Oenothera grandiflora family Onagraceae
with tough, spreading, simple stems, narrow ID difficulty leaves, large 1.
QUICK flowers CHECK: with Low long plant tubular bases, and pods with 4 broad wings.
yellow Perennial from a semi-woody root. Stems in clumps rather of up straight to 24, from and
DESCRIPTION: cm) long, leaning to prostrate or decumbent, tough, solid,
very short to 22" (56 thick, green or often red-maroon, roundish, slightly zigzag, leaves (baby
unbranched, to short, 1 cm soft, leaning hairs. Leaves alternate with tufts of smaller to
covered with some axils. Blades are 2-4.5" (5-11 cm) long, narrowly lanceolate narrowly with soft, elliptic, appressed tapered hairs. to
both ends, the in tips color and faintly raised above. Secondary veins 2-4 per side, arching strongly Petioles about 10%
branches) in pointed, often with a dark nipple. Both surfaces are faintly coated forward, light
Midvein color, flat light to raised above. Margins nearly entire but with a few scattered nipple-teeth. late
of in blade length, but it is hard to say where the petiole ends and the blade begins. Flowers (spring to sum-
mer) single from the leaf axils, opening in the afternoon and closing the next morning. The base is an enlarged
ovary, narrowed to a long tube (false pedicel) of uniform thickness, 3-5.5" (8-14 cm) long and 5-6 mm thick,
pale reddish and finely hairy. Sepals 4, pale yellow with maroon mottling, narrowly triangular, partially fused
with bristle tips. Petals 4. yellow fading to dull orange, obtusely angled at the base, the tip broad with 2 shal-
low lobes; there is an acuminate point between the lobes. Petal midvein is deeply depressed. The filaments
and style are yellow. The anthers are 11-14 mm long, linear, attached in the middle, and folded; the stigma is
4-pronged. Pods green, 1.5-2" (4-5 cm) long at maturity,
with 4 broad, rounded wings up to 1" (2.5 cm) wide.
HABITAT: Dry prairies, mostly where steep and rocky
on limestone. Also limestone road cuts and ledges.
Native.
FOOD USE: Both flowers and flower buds are excel-
ient raw or cooked, from spring to late summer. Con-
servation 1.
COMMENTS: This plant is remarkably distinct and
easy to recognize. The flowers are probably the largest
of any evening primrose in our region. This variable
species has been divided into different subspecies or
species based on regional variation. AKA Oenothera
missouriensis, Missouri evening-primrose.
(right) Flower bud. (far right) Winged pods.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE, 13 Bigfruit evening-primrose 2 2 Oenothera grandiflora family Onagraceae with tough, spreading, simple stems, narrow ID difficulty leaves, large 1. QUICK flowers CHECK: with Low long plant tubular bases, and pods with 4 broad wings. yellow Perennial from a semi-woody root. Stems in clumps rather of up straight to 24, from and DESCRIPTION: cm) long, leaning to prostrate or decumbent, tough, solid, very short to 22" (56 thick, green or often red-maroon, roundish, slightly zigzag, leaves (baby unbranched, to short, 1 cm soft, leaning hairs. Leaves alternate with tufts of smaller to covered with some axils. Blades are 2-4.5" (5-11 cm) long, narrowly lanceolate narrowly with soft, elliptic, appressed tapered hairs. to both ends, the in tips color and faintly raised above. Secondary veins 2-4 per side, arching strongly Petioles about 10% branches) in pointed, often with a dark nipple. Both surfaces are faintly coated forward, light Midvein color, flat light to raised above. Margins nearly entire but with a few scattered nipple-teeth. late of in blade length, but it is hard to say where the petiole ends and the blade begins. Flowers (spring to sum- mer) single from the leaf axils, opening in the afternoon and closing the next morning. The base is an enlarged ovary, narrowed to a long tube (false pedicel) of uniform thickness, 3-5.5" (8-14 cm) long and 5-6 mm thick, pale reddish and finely hairy. Sepals 4, pale yellow with maroon mottling, narrowly triangular, partially fused with bristle tips. Petals 4. yellow fading to dull orange, obtusely angled at the base, the tip broad with 2 shal- low lobes; there is an acuminate point between the lobes. Petal midvein is deeply depressed. The filaments and style are yellow. The anthers are 11-14 mm long, linear, attached in the middle, and folded; the stigma is 4-pronged. Pods green, 1.5-2" (4-5 cm) long at maturity, with 4 broad, rounded wings up to 1" (2.5 cm) wide. HABITAT: Dry prairies, mostly where steep and rocky on limestone. Also limestone road cuts and ledges. Native. FOOD USE: Both flowers and flower buds are excel- ient raw or cooked, from spring to late summer. Con- servation 1. COMMENTS: This plant is remarkably distinct and easy to recognize. The flowers are probably the largest of any evening primrose in our region. This variable species has been divided into different subspecies or species based on regional variation. AKA Oenothera missouriensis, Missouri evening-primrose. (right) Flower bud. (far right) Winged pods. 