BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED
1
Tarragon
Artemisia dracunculus Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK CHECK: Clumped, erect, thin, waist-high stems, the leaves linear, some of
lobed; often aromatic; panicles of numerous tiny flower heads. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: times Perennial with several to many clumped stems; variably aromatic,
strongly resembling cultivated tarragon. Stems erect to slightly leaning, to some-
tall and 5-8 mm thick, solid, tough, the surface mostly reddish brown, usually hairless 5 (1.5 m) at
maturity but sometimes soft-hairy, especially when young. Branches many and prominent,
compound, vertical or strongly ascending, with many crowded branchlets. Leaves alternate, sessile, crowded,
linear or with linear lobes, the blade to 1.3" (33 mm) long and 2-6 mm wide, gently tapered to both ends, the
tips narrow but mostly blunt. Margins toothless but may have one or two long, narrow lobes. Blades are flat,
fleshy, not tough, usually hairless at maturity but sometimes covered with soft, matted hairs (especially when
young), minutely dotted on both sides, covered with a thin waxy skin. Midvein slightly raised above; below it is
flat but has a minute groove. Other veins are obscure. Inflorescence narrow panicles 3-12" (8-30 cm) long with
scattered reduced leaves, the flower heads 1.5-2 mm across, each with a tiny bract, single or in small clusters
hanging to one side of the rachis, green turning red-brown. The florets and fruits are tiny and inconspicuous.
HABITAT: Dry prairies, especially on sandy or gravelly slopes. Native.
FOOD USE: Leaves can be used fresh or dried as a seasoning like domestic tarragon. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: Few people know that the familiar seasoning tarragon is native to North America and is wide-
spread in dry prairies. The wild plants have highly variable flavor; some are almost unscented, while others
have a strong aroma resembling cultivated clones.
-
-
-
617
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED 1 Tarragon Artemisia dracunculus Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK CHECK: Clumped, erect, thin, waist-high stems, the leaves linear, some of lobed; often aromatic; panicles of numerous tiny flower heads. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: times Perennial with several to many clumped stems; variably aromatic, strongly resembling cultivated tarragon. Stems erect to slightly leaning, to some- tall and 5-8 mm thick, solid, tough, the surface mostly reddish brown, usually hairless 5 (1.5 m) at maturity but sometimes soft-hairy, especially when young. Branches many and prominent, compound, vertical or strongly ascending, with many crowded branchlets. Leaves alternate, sessile, crowded, linear or with linear lobes, the blade to 1.3" (33 mm) long and 2-6 mm wide, gently tapered to both ends, the tips narrow but mostly blunt. Margins toothless but may have one or two long, narrow lobes. Blades are flat, fleshy, not tough, usually hairless at maturity but sometimes covered with soft, matted hairs (especially when young), minutely dotted on both sides, covered with a thin waxy skin. Midvein slightly raised above; below it is flat but has a minute groove. Other veins are obscure. Inflorescence narrow panicles 3-12" (8-30 cm) long with scattered reduced leaves, the flower heads 1.5-2 mm across, each with a tiny bract, single or in small clusters hanging to one side of the rachis, green turning red-brown. The florets and fruits are tiny and inconspicuous. HABITAT: Dry prairies, especially on sandy or gravelly slopes. Native. FOOD USE: Leaves can be used fresh or dried as a seasoning like domestic tarragon. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: Few people know that the familiar seasoning tarragon is native to North America and is wide- spread in dry prairies. The wild plants have highly variable flavor; some are almost unscented, while others have a strong aroma resembling cultivated clones. - - - 617 