BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE
GROUP 37 BASAL LEAVES ABSENT,
LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED
This contains several mallows, a few composites, a few members of the
amaranth group family, and some odds and ends. Many of them are physically very
distinct at a glance. A few members might key into group 36 if one interprets
their small lobes as large teeth.
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 37
The key is not your final answer!
Leaf entire and linear, or with 2-3 linear lobes.
Blade usually hairless, <6 mm wide; plant <20" (50 cm) tall.
1. Tarragon
or
Blade densely soft-hairy, >1cm wide; plant >20" (50 cm) tall.
3. Downy paintbrush
Lobed leaves palmate, or elongated with 2 lobes near the base.
Stem creeping or decumbent, less than 10" (25 cm) tall.
Stem hairless, flowers not showy.
4. Common pennywort
or
Stem with long hairs, flowers orange-red.
8. Bristly mallow
Stem erect to leaning, more than 10" (25 cm) tall.
All leaves deeply palmately lobed, most with 5 or more lobes.
Covered with needle-like stingers growing from white pustules.
5.Bull-nettle
or
Covered with needle-like, non-stinging hairs; no white pustules.
6. Pineland hibiscus
Hairless, the lobes almost linear and toothless.
7. Scarlet hibiscus
or
Lobed leaves typically have 3 major lobes, not deeply cut.
Lobed leaves all about as broad as long.
Erect wetland plant with giant pink flowers 5-9" (13-23 cm) across.
or
9. Swamp rose mallow
Leaning woodland plant with twisted scarlet flowers that never open.
Leaning to sprawling weed with non-showy flowers and spiny fruit.
11. Turk's cap mallow
Lobed leaves sometimes much longer than broad, with an elongated tip.
14. Cocklebur
Stem hairless or nearly so, flowers 4-5" (10-13 cm) across, stamens whitish.
Stem densely stiff-hairy. flowers 2" (5 cm) across, stamens yellow.
10. Halberd-leaf rose mallow
Stems densely soft-hairy, flowers 1" (2.5 cm) across, stamens maroon.
12. Seashore mallow
Leaves Lobes pinnately lobed, the blades clearly longer than wide with 2 or more lobes per side.
13. Marsh mallow
compound, each lobed again; stems clumped.
Lobes simple; stems single or few.
2. Mugwort
Blades hairless.
Tumbleweed. Sprawling seashore plant with succulent leaves.
or
15. Sea rocket
Erect to leaning stems; leaves with numerous, erratic teeth.
Blades hairy or velvety on one or both sides.
Erect stems; leaves with a few large teeth but no small ones,
16. Tumble ringwing
17, Epazote
Leaves Leaves less than 3" (8 cm) long with a few blunt teeth.
18. Maple-leaved goosefoot
Margins spiny.
more than 5" long with many sharp teeth.
19. Showy evening primrose
Margins not spiny.
20, Canada thistle
21. Burnweed
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE GROUP 37 BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED This contains several mallows, a few composites, a few members of the amaranth group family, and some odds and ends. Many of them are physically very distinct at a glance. A few members might key into group 36 if one interprets their small lobes as large teeth. TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 37 The key is not your final answer! Leaf entire and linear, or with 2-3 linear lobes. Blade usually hairless, <6 mm wide; plant <20" (50 cm) tall. 1. Tarragon or Blade densely soft-hairy, >1cm wide; plant >20" (50 cm) tall. 3. Downy paintbrush Lobed leaves palmate, or elongated with 2 lobes near the base. Stem creeping or decumbent, less than 10" (25 cm) tall. Stem hairless, flowers not showy. 4. Common pennywort or Stem with long hairs, flowers orange-red. 8. Bristly mallow Stem erect to leaning, more than 10" (25 cm) tall. All leaves deeply palmately lobed, most with 5 or more lobes. Covered with needle-like stingers growing from white pustules. 5.Bull-nettle or Covered with needle-like, non-stinging hairs; no white pustules. 6. Pineland hibiscus Hairless, the lobes almost linear and toothless. 7. Scarlet hibiscus or Lobed leaves typically have 3 major lobes, not deeply cut. Lobed leaves all about as broad as long. Erect wetland plant with giant pink flowers 5-9" (13-23 cm) across. or 9. Swamp rose mallow Leaning woodland plant with twisted scarlet flowers that never open. Leaning to sprawling weed with non-showy flowers and spiny fruit. 11. Turk's cap mallow Lobed leaves sometimes much longer than broad, with an elongated tip. 14. Cocklebur Stem hairless or nearly so, flowers 4-5" (10-13 cm) across, stamens whitish. Stem densely stiff-hairy. flowers 2" (5 cm) across, stamens yellow. 10. Halberd-leaf rose mallow Stems densely soft-hairy, flowers 1" (2.5 cm) across, stamens maroon. 12. Seashore mallow Leaves Lobes pinnately lobed, the blades clearly longer than wide with 2 or more lobes per side. 13. Marsh mallow compound, each lobed again; stems clumped. Lobes simple; stems single or few. 2. Mugwort Blades hairless. Tumbleweed. Sprawling seashore plant with succulent leaves. or 15. Sea rocket Erect to leaning stems; leaves with numerous, erratic teeth. Blades hairy or velvety on one or both sides. Erect stems; leaves with a few large teeth but no small ones, 16. Tumble ringwing 17, Epazote Leaves Leaves less than 3" (8 cm) long with a few blunt teeth. 18. Maple-leaved goosefoot Margins spiny. more than 5" long with many sharp teeth. 19. Showy evening primrose Margins not spiny. 20, Canada thistle 21. Burnweed 