BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED
3 Downy paintbrush
2
Castilleja sessiflora
family Orobanchaceae
QUICK CHECK: Shin-high, gray-green, hairy plant of dry prairies packed
pointed leaves and a spike of pale flowers layered with leaves. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Stems clumped, erect to leaning, 8-20" (20-50 cm) tall,
roundish but slightly ridged, usually not branching, very densely covered with soft. curvy
hairs. Shoots with drooping tops. LYDS stiff, curvy, dark brown, with many attached
4-lobed capsules 11-13 mm long in the terminal third, these opening toward the inside
with 2 recurved claw-like tips. Leaves alternate, clasping, 2-4" (5-10 long, densely soft-hairy on both sides,
folded along the midvein, pointed with a boat-tip. Lower leaves are entire and linear; upper leaves usually have
two long, forward-pointing lobes from just below the midpoint, roughly equal in length to the main blade. Leaves
have one prominent vein on each side of the midvein, light in color, deeply depressed above and protruding
below. Mini branch tufts are hidden in leaf axils. Inflorescence (spring) could be described as a leafy spike,
or as solitary flowers in the axils of each upper leaf. Calyx tube is light creamy yellow (or pink, especially in
southwestern parts of its range, 1.5-2" (4-5 cm) long, curved outward, ridged lengthwise, with soft hairs on
the ridges. Corolla tubular, about the same length, whitish, densely soft-hairy, slit open near the end from which
3-4 claw-like lobes emerge and a pistil protrudes; below that anthers with orange pollen peek out of the slot.
HABITAT: Dry prairies, especially around
rock outcroppings on limestone soil. Native. N
FOOD USE: Young shoots and tender tips
can be eaten raw or cooked. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: Being only partially parasitic,
this plant has a mild version of the odd but
pleasant "parasitic plant flavor" that is stron-
ger in louseworts (genus Pedicularis). Purple
paintbrush C. purpured is a similar species
of Texas and Oklahoma that normally has
bright flowers.
WARNING: These parasitic plants are sus-
pected of absorbing toxins from host piants
and should not be eaten when growing beside
poisonous species.
Castilleja sessiflora.
Castilleja purpured.
619
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED 3 Downy paintbrush 2 Castilleja sessiflora family Orobanchaceae QUICK CHECK: Shin-high, gray-green, hairy plant of dry prairies packed pointed leaves and a spike of pale flowers layered with leaves. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial. Stems clumped, erect to leaning, 8-20" (20-50 cm) tall, roundish but slightly ridged, usually not branching, very densely covered with soft. curvy hairs. Shoots with drooping tops. LYDS stiff, curvy, dark brown, with many attached 4-lobed capsules 11-13 mm long in the terminal third, these opening toward the inside with 2 recurved claw-like tips. Leaves alternate, clasping, 2-4" (5-10 long, densely soft-hairy on both sides, folded along the midvein, pointed with a boat-tip. Lower leaves are entire and linear; upper leaves usually have two long, forward-pointing lobes from just below the midpoint, roughly equal in length to the main blade. Leaves have one prominent vein on each side of the midvein, light in color, deeply depressed above and protruding below. Mini branch tufts are hidden in leaf axils. Inflorescence (spring) could be described as a leafy spike, or as solitary flowers in the axils of each upper leaf. Calyx tube is light creamy yellow (or pink, especially in southwestern parts of its range, 1.5-2" (4-5 cm) long, curved outward, ridged lengthwise, with soft hairs on the ridges. Corolla tubular, about the same length, whitish, densely soft-hairy, slit open near the end from which 3-4 claw-like lobes emerge and a pistil protrudes; below that anthers with orange pollen peek out of the slot. HABITAT: Dry prairies, especially around rock outcroppings on limestone soil. Native. N FOOD USE: Young shoots and tender tips can be eaten raw or cooked. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: Being only partially parasitic, this plant has a mild version of the odd but pleasant "parasitic plant flavor" that is stron- ger in louseworts (genus Pedicularis). Purple paintbrush C. purpured is a similar species of Texas and Oklahoma that normally has bright flowers. WARNING: These parasitic plants are sus- pected of absorbing toxins from host piants and should not be eaten when growing beside poisonous species. Castilleja sessiflora. Castilleja purpured. 619 