BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED
2
Mugwort vulgaris Asteraceae (Composite family) lobed
QUICK with CHECK: silvery, woolly undersides. ID
Artemisia Tall, aromatic, clumped, difficulty grayish plant 2. with doubly pinnately grayish from a
DESCRIPTION: leaves 4-7' Tall (1.2-2.1m) aromatic perennial tall and 4-9 from mm rhizomes, thick, straight. on colonies ridge stiff, tops. appearing solid/pithy. LYDS nearly roundish woody.
distance. Stems often reddish, woolly, especially third, small, strongly ascending. sessile
Rapidly
reddish-brown. but Mature irregularly ridged, often Branches lean or numerous arch due but to the only weight in the upper of and the deeply fruits. pinnately Leaves alternate, lobed or divided
expanding.
or on short plants the petioles, midvein), the the blades lobes 2-7" wider (5-18 toward long the end, There bearing are large often teeth a few or small smaller lobes lobes. at the Each leaf of Leaves the base larger that get
divisions curl (nearly back to around is again the pinnately stem. Leaves lobed, are but crowded more shallowly. on the lower stem in spring. almost appearing basal.
smaller, thinner, and simpler going up
the stalk; upper leaves may be entire
or have just a few elongated lobes.
Surface nearly hairless on top, but
coated with fine, dense, whitish wool
on the underside. Veins prominent,
depressed and light-colored above,
darker and protruding below, running
to lobe tips, which have a light-colored
nipple. Inflorescence a panicle or
panicles interspersed with smaller
leaves and bearing hundreds of tiny
composite flowerheads on short
stalks. Florets (midsummer to fall)
greenish yellow, bearing single-
seeded fruits (achenes).
CONFUSING PLANTS: Common
ragweed (Ambrosia artemisifolio) is
a much shorter annual, not clump-
ing, without crowded lower leaves in
spring, and the leaves have longer,
thinner, and more numerous lobes.
HABITAT: Sunny, well-drained, usu-
ally coarse soil; roadsides, railroad
banks, empty lots, fields. Introduced.
FOOD USE: The leaves can be used
as a tea or in tea mixtures, fresh or
dried. The youngest shoots and leaves
can be eaten sparingly raw or cooked,
more as a seasoning than a vegeta-
ble. To find young shoots in spring,
remember the location of colonies
from the previous growing season,
or look for the distinctive old stalks.
COMMENTS: This herb has a rich
tradition of use both as a flavoring
and a medicinal. Before the introduc-
tion of hops to England, mugwort was
often used to flavor beer, hence the
name
618
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED 2 Mugwort vulgaris Asteraceae (Composite family) lobed QUICK with CHECK: silvery, woolly undersides. ID Artemisia Tall, aromatic, clumped, difficulty grayish plant 2. with doubly pinnately grayish from a DESCRIPTION: leaves 4-7' Tall (1.2-2.1m) aromatic perennial tall and 4-9 from mm rhizomes, thick, straight. on colonies ridge stiff, tops. appearing solid/pithy. LYDS nearly roundish woody. distance. Stems often reddish, woolly, especially third, small, strongly ascending. sessile Rapidly reddish-brown. but Mature irregularly ridged, often Branches lean or numerous arch due but to the only weight in the upper of and the deeply fruits. pinnately Leaves alternate, lobed or divided expanding. or on short plants the petioles, midvein), the the blades lobes 2-7" wider (5-18 toward long the end, There bearing are large often teeth a few or small smaller lobes lobes. at the Each leaf of Leaves the base larger that get divisions curl (nearly back to around is again the pinnately stem. Leaves lobed, are but crowded more shallowly. on the lower stem in spring. almost appearing basal. smaller, thinner, and simpler going up the stalk; upper leaves may be entire or have just a few elongated lobes. Surface nearly hairless on top, but coated with fine, dense, whitish wool on the underside. Veins prominent, depressed and light-colored above, darker and protruding below, running to lobe tips, which have a light-colored nipple. Inflorescence a panicle or panicles interspersed with smaller leaves and bearing hundreds of tiny composite flowerheads on short stalks. Florets (midsummer to fall) greenish yellow, bearing single- seeded fruits (achenes). CONFUSING PLANTS: Common ragweed (Ambrosia artemisifolio) is a much shorter annual, not clump- ing, without crowded lower leaves in spring, and the leaves have longer, thinner, and more numerous lobes. HABITAT: Sunny, well-drained, usu- ally coarse soil; roadsides, railroad banks, empty lots, fields. Introduced. FOOD USE: The leaves can be used as a tea or in tea mixtures, fresh or dried. The youngest shoots and leaves can be eaten sparingly raw or cooked, more as a seasoning than a vegeta- ble. To find young shoots in spring, remember the location of colonies from the previous growing season, or look for the distinctive old stalks. COMMENTS: This herb has a rich tradition of use both as a flavoring and a medicinal. Before the introduc- tion of hops to England, mugwort was often used to flavor beer, hence the name 618 