I'em
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED
and brown when ripe. Each nut looks like a beetle
state
and has a light fleshy appendage (called a caruncle)
that looks like the beetle's head attached at one end.
HABITAT: Sandy, sunny, well-drained sites, especially
where disturbed. Roadsides, hillsides, dunes, and
pastures. Native.
A
FOOD USE: Ripe nuts are delicious, available through
late summer and fall. Collect them with tongs or very
thick gloves and parch off the stingers before removing
the husks. You have to take off 3 layers to get to the
kernels. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: The roots are reported to be edible
but are enormous and hard to dig out, and I have not
tried them. The nuts are delicious, and well protected.
AKA great spurge-nettle.
WARNING: Causes serious, painful stings!
Related edible:
Spurge-nettle
Cnidoscolus stimulosus
2
1
NY
This plant lives in sandy
soil and prefers full sun
in similar habitats fur-
ther east, especially
near the coast. It is very
similar but smaller in
all respects. The nuts
are likewise edible, but
smaller and more diffi-
cult to get out. I've eaten
the root of this species,
which is okay when
cooked. A
021
I'em BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED and brown when ripe. Each nut looks like a beetle state and has a light fleshy appendage (called a caruncle) that looks like the beetle's head attached at one end. HABITAT: Sandy, sunny, well-drained sites, especially where disturbed. Roadsides, hillsides, dunes, and pastures. Native. A FOOD USE: Ripe nuts are delicious, available through late summer and fall. Collect them with tongs or very thick gloves and parch off the stingers before removing the husks. You have to take off 3 layers to get to the kernels. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: The roots are reported to be edible but are enormous and hard to dig out, and I have not tried them. The nuts are delicious, and well protected. AKA great spurge-nettle. WARNING: Causes serious, painful stings! Related edible: Spurge-nettle Cnidoscolus stimulosus 2 1 NY This plant lives in sandy soil and prefers full sun in similar habitats fur- ther east, especially near the coast. It is very similar but smaller in all respects. The nuts are likewise edible, but smaller and more diffi- cult to get out. I've eaten the root of this species, which is okay when cooked. A 021 