BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVI
4 Common pennywort
1
(Ginseng
family)
Hydrocotyle
americana
Araliaceae
QUICK CHECK: Low plant with palmate, shallow-lobed, smooth and shiny leaves with
blunt teeth. ID difficulty 1.
perennial herb to 9" (23 cm) tall, from a rhizome fibrous with a few but
DESCRIPTION: Stems Creeping light in color, smooth, round, 1-2 mm thick, hairless, not rounded
constrictions. few, alternate, 0.3-1.5" (8-38 mm) long, flat, thin, shiny, hairless, rounded
turgid. outline Leaves with shallow palmate lobes, each of these with a few large, blunt, round,
teeth. smooth, Major attached at the edge of the blade (not peltate), with small stipules. Inflorescence with a tiny, flowers, nearly each ses-
in veins 5-7 protrude above and are flat below. Petiole 80-220% of blade length,
sile umbel hidden under the leaves, 3-7
on a very short pedicel. Flowers about 2 mm across with
5 ovate, pointed, whitish petals. Fruit a tiny flat schizocarp
breaking into 2 seeds.
HABITAT: Moist, shady, often disturbed sites associated
with conifer forests, such as forest clearings, stream valleys,
along dirt roads or trails, seepages, swamp margins. Native.
FOOD USE: Greens can be eaten raw or cooked, from
spring through early autumn. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This mud-loving plant is low, tiny, and often
hard to notice but sometimes abundant. See close relatives
on pages 221 and 288.
5 Texas bull-nettle
3
Cnidoscolus texanum Euphorbiaceae (Spurge family)
QUICK CHECK: Large spreading plant with numerous stinging, white-based needle-
hairs and deeply ruffled, palmately lobed leaves. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Robust perennial from an enormous root; sap milky. Petioles, leaves,
peduncles, pedicels, calyx, fruit, and even the outside of the corolla are armed with stinging
hairs! Stems stout, up to 1.3" (33 mm) thick, often multiple per plant, branching near the
base at broad angles and spreading up to 7' (2 m) wide, the branches often resting on the
ground. The hairs surface is bright green with elongated white dots from which long, whitish,
Texas bull-nettle
or smaller palmately lobes. lobed with usually 5 major lobes, the lobe margins with extremely so)
and stinging deeply arise. Leaves alternate, ruffled (those near the inflorescence
(western range)
and spurge-
Lower leaves are 5-9" (13-23 cm) long; the upper leaves erratic are smaller, teeth
nettle (eastern
range).
Veins are light in color. Petiole long, thick,
rounded, unchanneled, about equal to the
blade. Inflorescence umbel or umbel-like,
with usually 3-4 rays at the first juncture,
each terminating in a tight cluster of nearly
sessile flowers or fruit. Flowers (mid to late
summer) have a tube about 1" (2.5 cm)
long spreading into 5 thick, white, blunt-
tipped lobes about 1" (2.5 cm) long. Sexual
parts are buried deep in the tube. Fruit
ellipsoid, (23 green, 3-part capsule about an
mm) long, covered with stingers. Each 0.9"
capsule skin, contains 3 nuts encased in a
as each about 0.6" (15 mm) long and fleshy halt
tened wide, rounded on the outside and
on the inside, the thin shell smooth flat-
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVI 4 Common pennywort 1 (Ginseng family) Hydrocotyle americana Araliaceae QUICK CHECK: Low plant with palmate, shallow-lobed, smooth and shiny leaves with blunt teeth. ID difficulty 1. perennial herb to 9" (23 cm) tall, from a rhizome fibrous with a few but DESCRIPTION: Stems Creeping light in color, smooth, round, 1-2 mm thick, hairless, not rounded constrictions. few, alternate, 0.3-1.5" (8-38 mm) long, flat, thin, shiny, hairless, rounded turgid. outline Leaves with shallow palmate lobes, each of these with a few large, blunt, round, teeth. smooth, Major attached at the edge of the blade (not peltate), with small stipules. Inflorescence with a tiny, flowers, nearly each ses- in veins 5-7 protrude above and are flat below. Petiole 80-220% of blade length, sile umbel hidden under the leaves, 3-7 on a very short pedicel. Flowers about 2 mm across with 5 ovate, pointed, whitish petals. Fruit a tiny flat schizocarp breaking into 2 seeds. HABITAT: Moist, shady, often disturbed sites associated with conifer forests, such as forest clearings, stream valleys, along dirt roads or trails, seepages, swamp margins. Native. FOOD USE: Greens can be eaten raw or cooked, from spring through early autumn. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This mud-loving plant is low, tiny, and often hard to notice but sometimes abundant. See close relatives on pages 221 and 288. 5 Texas bull-nettle 3 Cnidoscolus texanum Euphorbiaceae (Spurge family) QUICK CHECK: Large spreading plant with numerous stinging, white-based needle- hairs and deeply ruffled, palmately lobed leaves. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Robust perennial from an enormous root; sap milky. Petioles, leaves, peduncles, pedicels, calyx, fruit, and even the outside of the corolla are armed with stinging hairs! Stems stout, up to 1.3" (33 mm) thick, often multiple per plant, branching near the base at broad angles and spreading up to 7' (2 m) wide, the branches often resting on the ground. The hairs surface is bright green with elongated white dots from which long, whitish, Texas bull-nettle or smaller palmately lobes. lobed with usually 5 major lobes, the lobe margins with extremely so) and stinging deeply arise. Leaves alternate, ruffled (those near the inflorescence (western range) and spurge- Lower leaves are 5-9" (13-23 cm) long; the upper leaves erratic are smaller, teeth nettle (eastern range). Veins are light in color. Petiole long, thick, rounded, unchanneled, about equal to the blade. Inflorescence umbel or umbel-like, with usually 3-4 rays at the first juncture, each terminating in a tight cluster of nearly sessile flowers or fruit. Flowers (mid to late summer) have a tube about 1" (2.5 cm) long spreading into 5 thick, white, blunt- tipped lobes about 1" (2.5 cm) long. Sexual parts are buried deep in the tube. Fruit ellipsoid, (23 green, 3-part capsule about an mm) long, covered with stingers. Each 0.9" capsule skin, contains 3 nuts encased in a as each about 0.6" (15 mm) long and fleshy halt tened wide, rounded on the outside and on the inside, the thin shell smooth flat- 