BASAL
LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED
7
Scarlet hibiscus
3
3
3
Hibiscus coccineus
Malvaceae (Mallow family)
QUICK lobed, hemp-like CHECK: Tall, clumped, smooth-stemmed plant of swamps
leaves and enormous bright red flowers with 5 petals. with ID large, difficulty deeply 1.
DESCRIPTION: and 1" Perennial from a woody base. Stems usually several, to 8'
solid (2.5 cm) thick, erect, sometimes branched above but always much taller (2.4 m) tall
or with a tiny hollow, roundish, the surface smooth and hairless, to than wide,
bloom-covered. with LYDS prominent, stiff and strong with stringy bark, dark green brown, maroon,
a small hollow. Leaves alternate, hemp-like, at a right angle to the petiole, deeply pithy palmately cleft
usually 5 divisions, these sometimes fully separated leaflets but more often lobes with at least a narrow into
connecting them. Divisions very narrowly lanceolate with acuminate tips, to 7" (18 cm) long and 1.2" (3 wing cm)
wide, usually folded along the midvein, drooping, the surfaces smooth and hairless. Primary veins raised in
a shallow trough above, often purplish; they protrude below. Secondary veins 25-40° to the primary, widely
separated, arching toward the tip, flat to faintly protruding on both sides. Margins have sparse erratic teeth
and are often purplish; teeth lack claws, nipples, or bristles. Petioles about equal to blade length, strongly
ascending, rounded with no grooves, solid, lacking stipules. Flowers buds sharp-pointed, forming ridges
where the sepals meet; 10-14 linear bracts curve around the bud. Flowers borne singly on long pedicels from
upper leaf axils, to 6" (15 cm) wide, deep scarlet with a white eye in the center. Petals 5, veiny, broad at the tip
and narrowed at the base, not overlapping when fully open. Sepals 5, long-pointed, sharp-tipped, light green,
showing through the gaps between petals. Fruit an egg-shaped, multi-sectioned, many-seeded, ridged pod
about 1" (2.5 cm) long, green at first turning brown.
HABITAT: Swamps, marshes, and ditches in full sun to moderate shade. Native.
FOOD USE: In spring and early summer the leafy stem tips make excellent greens raw or cooked. The flower
buds are a great vegetable; I have never had a chance to try the immature pods. Flowers are both delicious
and beautiful. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: The enormous scarlet flowers shine like a beacon from swamps on warm summer mornings. It
is used often (but not nearly enough) as an ornamental. The greens are easy to gather in quantity due to the
large size; be sure not to overdo it. This plant is often erroneously reported as "not edible" simply because
it lacks the tangy flavor of some commercially cultivated hibiscuses. This is a strange conclusion because,
actually, most vegetables don't taste like cranberries.
623
Tender tip.
Flower bud.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED 7 Scarlet hibiscus 3 3 3 Hibiscus coccineus Malvaceae (Mallow family) QUICK lobed, hemp-like CHECK: Tall, clumped, smooth-stemmed plant of swamps leaves and enormous bright red flowers with 5 petals. with ID large, difficulty deeply 1. DESCRIPTION: and 1" Perennial from a woody base. Stems usually several, to 8' solid (2.5 cm) thick, erect, sometimes branched above but always much taller (2.4 m) tall or with a tiny hollow, roundish, the surface smooth and hairless, to than wide, bloom-covered. with LYDS prominent, stiff and strong with stringy bark, dark green brown, maroon, a small hollow. Leaves alternate, hemp-like, at a right angle to the petiole, deeply pithy palmately cleft usually 5 divisions, these sometimes fully separated leaflets but more often lobes with at least a narrow into connecting them. Divisions very narrowly lanceolate with acuminate tips, to 7" (18 cm) long and 1.2" (3 wing cm) wide, usually folded along the midvein, drooping, the surfaces smooth and hairless. Primary veins raised in a shallow trough above, often purplish; they protrude below. Secondary veins 25-40° to the primary, widely separated, arching toward the tip, flat to faintly protruding on both sides. Margins have sparse erratic teeth and are often purplish; teeth lack claws, nipples, or bristles. Petioles about equal to blade length, strongly ascending, rounded with no grooves, solid, lacking stipules. Flowers buds sharp-pointed, forming ridges where the sepals meet; 10-14 linear bracts curve around the bud. Flowers borne singly on long pedicels from upper leaf axils, to 6" (15 cm) wide, deep scarlet with a white eye in the center. Petals 5, veiny, broad at the tip and narrowed at the base, not overlapping when fully open. Sepals 5, long-pointed, sharp-tipped, light green, showing through the gaps between petals. Fruit an egg-shaped, multi-sectioned, many-seeded, ridged pod about 1" (2.5 cm) long, green at first turning brown. HABITAT: Swamps, marshes, and ditches in full sun to moderate shade. Native. FOOD USE: In spring and early summer the leafy stem tips make excellent greens raw or cooked. The flower buds are a great vegetable; I have never had a chance to try the immature pods. Flowers are both delicious and beautiful. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: The enormous scarlet flowers shine like a beacon from swamps on warm summer mornings. It is used often (but not nearly enough) as an ornamental. The greens are easy to gather in quantity due to the large size; be sure not to overdo it. This plant is often erroneously reported as "not edible" simply because it lacks the tangy flavor of some commercially cultivated hibiscuses. This is a strange conclusion because, actually, most vegetables don't taste like cranberries. 623 Tender tip. Flower bud. 