BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED
9 Swamp rose mallow
1
Hibiscus moscheutos Malvaceae (Mallow 3 family)
QUICK CHECK: Tall, clumped, wetland plant with 3-lobed leaves and giant pink flow-
ers. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a woody root crown. Stems clumped, 4-7' (1.2-2.1m)
tall, erect to slightly leaning, zigzag, unbranched or with a few branches in the
half, solid and roundish, to 0.8" (2 cm) thick, the surface green with scattered clumps upper
of short, stiff, curved hairs. Leaves alternate, 4-9" (10-23 cm) long, the base broad and
the tip acuminate; terminal leaves are broadly ovate, while the lower and middle ones often have 3 shallow,
sharp-tipped lobes. The blade is tough, dark, not glossy, velvety on both sides but more so below. There are
3-5 major veins from the base, offset by light color, protruding slightly in a gentle valley above, protruding
strongly below. Margins have large, irregular, blunt teeth. Petiole 20-80% of blade length, often upturned,
velvety, enlarged just before the blade, roughly triangular with a faint groove. Flowers (mid to late summer)
single from upper axils, on velvety pedicels 1-1.7" (25-43 mm) long. Flower buds about 1" (2.5 cm) long and
almost as wide, abruptly pointed, with 5 broad wings starting near the midpoint and 10-14 linear bracts about
0.9" (23 mm) long neatly arranged around it, curving inward but not touching the bud. Calyx green and sym-
metrical with 5 lobes joined at the base. Petais 5, large, blunt, 3-5" (8-13 cm) long, overlapping at the base,
pink with darker veins, corrugated below from protruding veins. The central column is white, the tip divided
into a 5-lobed stigma; sexual parts have yellow tips. Pods short and stout but pointed, breaking into sections
upon drying to release the seeds.
HABITAT: Sunny, rich sites along waterways; marsh edges, riverbanks, floodplain openings, ditches, lake and
pond shores. Native, but often planted as an ornamental.
Young pods.
FOOD USE: Tender young leaves can be eaten in early summer-they
are better cooked, but are always rather tough. Flowers and flower
buds are edible in mid to late summer. Immature pods are somewhat
like okra, and are the best part of the plant. You have to get them
before they toughen, while they are less than full-size (pod sides
should not yet touch the cup formed by the calyx). Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This plant has one of the largest flowers native to
our region. The immature pods are a tiny fraction of the biomass,
but they are good food. Swamp rose mallow is worth planting for its
beauty alone; the pods are a bonus. Giant rose mallow H. grundiflo-
rus of the coastal Deep
South is an even larger
species with more deeply
lobed leaves. It is simi-
larly edible.
mal
625
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED 9 Swamp rose mallow 1 Hibiscus moscheutos Malvaceae (Mallow 3 family) QUICK CHECK: Tall, clumped, wetland plant with 3-lobed leaves and giant pink flow- ers. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a woody root crown. Stems clumped, 4-7' (1.2-2.1m) tall, erect to slightly leaning, zigzag, unbranched or with a few branches in the half, solid and roundish, to 0.8" (2 cm) thick, the surface green with scattered clumps upper of short, stiff, curved hairs. Leaves alternate, 4-9" (10-23 cm) long, the base broad and the tip acuminate; terminal leaves are broadly ovate, while the lower and middle ones often have 3 shallow, sharp-tipped lobes. The blade is tough, dark, not glossy, velvety on both sides but more so below. There are 3-5 major veins from the base, offset by light color, protruding slightly in a gentle valley above, protruding strongly below. Margins have large, irregular, blunt teeth. Petiole 20-80% of blade length, often upturned, velvety, enlarged just before the blade, roughly triangular with a faint groove. Flowers (mid to late summer) single from upper axils, on velvety pedicels 1-1.7" (25-43 mm) long. Flower buds about 1" (2.5 cm) long and almost as wide, abruptly pointed, with 5 broad wings starting near the midpoint and 10-14 linear bracts about 0.9" (23 mm) long neatly arranged around it, curving inward but not touching the bud. Calyx green and sym- metrical with 5 lobes joined at the base. Petais 5, large, blunt, 3-5" (8-13 cm) long, overlapping at the base, pink with darker veins, corrugated below from protruding veins. The central column is white, the tip divided into a 5-lobed stigma; sexual parts have yellow tips. Pods short and stout but pointed, breaking into sections upon drying to release the seeds. HABITAT: Sunny, rich sites along waterways; marsh edges, riverbanks, floodplain openings, ditches, lake and pond shores. Native, but often planted as an ornamental. Young pods. FOOD USE: Tender young leaves can be eaten in early summer-they are better cooked, but are always rather tough. Flowers and flower buds are edible in mid to late summer. Immature pods are somewhat like okra, and are the best part of the plant. You have to get them before they toughen, while they are less than full-size (pod sides should not yet touch the cup formed by the calyx). Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This plant has one of the largest flowers native to our region. The immature pods are a tiny fraction of the biomass, but they are good food. Swamp rose mallow is worth planting for its beauty alone; the pods are a bonus. Giant rose mallow H. grundiflo- rus of the coastal Deep South is an even larger species with more deeply lobed leaves. It is simi- larly edible. mal 625 