BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE
8 mallow
Modiola Bristly caroliniana 3 Malvaceae (Mallow family)
CHECK: Ground-hugging lawn plant with palmately lobed alternate leaves, tiny
QUICK and bristly round fruits. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Low, creeping, base), creeping, rooting from nodes, usually the ground,
red flowers, short-lived perennial. Stems to 40" ground-hugging (1 m) long, single and or
multiple rising slightly (branched at the tips at the but or sometimes branching clambering sparsely above over other the base; plants rounded well above in cross (20-36 section, mm) solic lor
with scattered long, erect hairs and large teeth. Leaves near the flowers have the lobes and nar
2-5 mm thick, unbranched glandular dots. Leaves alternate, 0.8-1.4"
5-7 lobed, each lobe to with the smaller leaf center. lobes The or surface is often ruffled, with scattered long below. hairs Petio
more deeply, almost veins mostly from the base, raised above and slightly protruding 2-3 mm. Flo
pointed teeth. Major 60-120% of blade length. Stipules entire, lanceolate to triangular, just a br
channeled, hairy, borne singly in leaf axils, with 5 scarlet petals, opening central for vein
through morning. fall) The 7-10 calyx mm is symmetrical across, with 5 triangular lobes, each with a prominent
tip. Fruit a many-sectioned wheel about
9 mm across, ripening to chocolate
brown, each section U-shaped with hairy
margins, the tip with a fine bristle.
HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny ground
such as lawns, sidewalk cracks, vacant
lots, gardens. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender leaves and stem tips
can be eaten raw or cooked-all year but
especially from late winter to early sum-
mer. Leaves can be chopped and steeped
for tea. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This mallow has a beauti-
ful flower that is hard to get a glimpse
of. The flavor of the greens is excellent,
if you can find a clean handful-much
better than the more well-known com-
mon mallow.
624
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE 8 mallow Modiola Bristly caroliniana 3 Malvaceae (Mallow family) CHECK: Ground-hugging lawn plant with palmately lobed alternate leaves, tiny QUICK and bristly round fruits. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Low, creeping, base), creeping, rooting from nodes, usually the ground, red flowers, short-lived perennial. Stems to 40" ground-hugging (1 m) long, single and or multiple rising slightly (branched at the tips at the but or sometimes branching clambering sparsely above over other the base; plants rounded well above in cross (20-36 section, mm) solic lor with scattered long, erect hairs and large teeth. Leaves near the flowers have the lobes and nar 2-5 mm thick, unbranched glandular dots. Leaves alternate, 0.8-1.4" 5-7 lobed, each lobe to with the smaller leaf center. lobes The or surface is often ruffled, with scattered long below. hairs Petio more deeply, almost veins mostly from the base, raised above and slightly protruding 2-3 mm. Flo pointed teeth. Major 60-120% of blade length. Stipules entire, lanceolate to triangular, just a br channeled, hairy, borne singly in leaf axils, with 5 scarlet petals, opening central for vein through morning. fall) The 7-10 calyx mm is symmetrical across, with 5 triangular lobes, each with a prominent tip. Fruit a many-sectioned wheel about 9 mm across, ripening to chocolate brown, each section U-shaped with hairy margins, the tip with a fine bristle. HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny ground such as lawns, sidewalk cracks, vacant lots, gardens. Native. FOOD USE: Tender leaves and stem tips can be eaten raw or cooked-all year but especially from late winter to early sum- mer. Leaves can be chopped and steeped for tea. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This mallow has a beauti- ful flower that is hard to get a glimpse of. The flavor of the greens is excellent, if you can find a clean handful-much better than the more well-known com- mon mallow. 624 