BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED
Related edible:
10 Halberd-leaf rose mallow
2
2
2
3
Hibiscus laevis + Malvaceae (Mallow family)
This species is similar but smaller in all respects, and in general is much more common. The
stems are somewhat shorter and thinner, 3-5' (1-1.5 m) tall, with the surface smooth and
hairless or nearly so. The leaves are much narrower, either triangular or with 2 prominent
lobes near the base, and the surfaces are faintly hairy to hairless. The flowers are smaller,
with white to pink petals and a deep red center. This species is more of a generalist than the
swamp rose mallow, found in full to partial sun in swamps or at the margins of lakes, rivers,
ditches, and ponds with muck or clay soil, and in wet meadows and around depressions in disturbed fields near
waterways. Flower buds, flowers, and immature pods are all edible in mid to late summer. The young greens of
rapidly growing stems
in late spring and early
summer are more ten-
der and better eating
than those of its larger
cousin. AKA Hibiscus
militaris, smooth rose
mallow. ID difficulty 1.
Tender tip.
626
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED Related edible: 10 Halberd-leaf rose mallow 2 2 2 3 Hibiscus laevis + Malvaceae (Mallow family) This species is similar but smaller in all respects, and in general is much more common. The stems are somewhat shorter and thinner, 3-5' (1-1.5 m) tall, with the surface smooth and hairless or nearly so. The leaves are much narrower, either triangular or with 2 prominent lobes near the base, and the surfaces are faintly hairy to hairless. The flowers are smaller, with white to pink petals and a deep red center. This species is more of a generalist than the swamp rose mallow, found in full to partial sun in swamps or at the margins of lakes, rivers, ditches, and ponds with muck or clay soil, and in wet meadows and around depressions in disturbed fields near waterways. Flower buds, flowers, and immature pods are all edible in mid to late summer. The young greens of rapidly growing stems in late spring and early summer are more ten- der and better eating than those of its larger cousin. AKA Hibiscus militaris, smooth rose mallow. ID difficulty 1. Tender tip. 626 