revis
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED
11 Turk's cap mallow
1
2
3
Malvaviscus arboreus Malvaceae (Mallow family)
QUICK CHECK: Tall, leaning plant with multiple stems. soft-hairy palmately
leaves, and scarlet flowers that are closed and twisted with a protruding
red fruit. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Semi-woody perennial 3-8' (1-2.5 m) tall with multiple stems from the
base, evergreen or nearly so, often in colonies. Stems round and solid, to 1cm thick, mostly
leaning, with short ascending branches concentrated in the upper part. Bark green, fibrous, peeling readily,
densely covered with soft, fine, curved hairs. Leaves alternate, to 6" (15 cm) long and almost equally wide,
thin, hairy on both sides with 3 shallow, palmate lobes. Major veins 3-5 from the base; these and the veinlets
are modestly depressed above. Margins have large, irregular, blunt-pointed teeth. Upper leaves have small,
linear stipules. Petioles 60-80% of blade length, straight, soft-hairy, elliptic in cross section, deeper than
wide, not channeled, enlarged and upcurved toward the tip. Inflorescence terminal, small clusters of 2-3 or
panicles interrupted by miniature leaves. Flowers scarlet, the petals not opening, remaining wrapped tightly
around the protruding column. There are 4-5 thin, light green, hairy sepals fused more than halfway from the
base, the lobes triangular with a prominent central vein. Outside the sepals are 7-8 entire, hairy, linear bracts,
blunt-pointed and broadened near the tip. Column bright red, spiraled, protruding up to 1" (2.5 cm), the tip
split into several parts. Fruit red, broad and flattened, 0.6" (15 mm) wide and 0.3" (8 mm) long, wheel-like
with a star-shaped depression in the end, the flesh white. The fruit breaks into 5 sections, each with a large
crunchy seed. Juice is clear to faintly reddish.
HABITAT: Open forests and forest borders, brushy areas; pine and oak savannahs, especially x on limestone
soils. Native.
FOOD USE: Young leaves are
edible but mediocre as cooked
greens. Flowers and ripe fruits.
which are available for most of the
growing season (but especially in
late summer and fall) are delicious
raw nibbles. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: A large, gorgeous
charismatic mallow. The greens
are hardly worth mentioning, but
the flowers are good, and the fruit
is delicious and unique. These are
not for making jam or juice-just
eat them. The flavor is mild and
sweet, reminding me of raw figs
and prickly pears. and the crunchy
seeds are like little nuts inside. This
-dependent species has become
uncommon in the eastern part of its
range, where fires and limestone
are infrequent. Plant some!
027
revis BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED 11 Turk's cap mallow 1 2 3 Malvaviscus arboreus Malvaceae (Mallow family) QUICK CHECK: Tall, leaning plant with multiple stems. soft-hairy palmately leaves, and scarlet flowers that are closed and twisted with a protruding red fruit. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Semi-woody perennial 3-8' (1-2.5 m) tall with multiple stems from the base, evergreen or nearly so, often in colonies. Stems round and solid, to 1cm thick, mostly leaning, with short ascending branches concentrated in the upper part. Bark green, fibrous, peeling readily, densely covered with soft, fine, curved hairs. Leaves alternate, to 6" (15 cm) long and almost equally wide, thin, hairy on both sides with 3 shallow, palmate lobes. Major veins 3-5 from the base; these and the veinlets are modestly depressed above. Margins have large, irregular, blunt-pointed teeth. Upper leaves have small, linear stipules. Petioles 60-80% of blade length, straight, soft-hairy, elliptic in cross section, deeper than wide, not channeled, enlarged and upcurved toward the tip. Inflorescence terminal, small clusters of 2-3 or panicles interrupted by miniature leaves. Flowers scarlet, the petals not opening, remaining wrapped tightly around the protruding column. There are 4-5 thin, light green, hairy sepals fused more than halfway from the base, the lobes triangular with a prominent central vein. Outside the sepals are 7-8 entire, hairy, linear bracts, blunt-pointed and broadened near the tip. Column bright red, spiraled, protruding up to 1" (2.5 cm), the tip split into several parts. Fruit red, broad and flattened, 0.6" (15 mm) wide and 0.3" (8 mm) long, wheel-like with a star-shaped depression in the end, the flesh white. The fruit breaks into 5 sections, each with a large crunchy seed. Juice is clear to faintly reddish. HABITAT: Open forests and forest borders, brushy areas; pine and oak savannahs, especially x on limestone soils. Native. FOOD USE: Young leaves are edible but mediocre as cooked greens. Flowers and ripe fruits. which are available for most of the growing season (but especially in late summer and fall) are delicious raw nibbles. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: A large, gorgeous charismatic mallow. The greens are hardly worth mentioning, but the flowers are good, and the fruit is delicious and unique. These are not for making jam or juice-just eat them. The flavor is mild and sweet, reminding me of raw figs and prickly pears. and the crunchy seeds are like little nuts inside. This -dependent species has become uncommon in the eastern part of its range, where fires and limestone are infrequent. Plant some! 027 