BASAL LEAVES ASSENT,
12 Seashore mallow
1
1
1
Malvaceae
(Mallow
family)
Kosteletzkya
pentacarpos
Chest-high seashore plant with grayish, rough-hairy stems central and column. long-
pointed QUICK CHECK: leaves; large, showy, 5-petaled pink flowers with a thick, yellow
ID difficulty 1.
Perennial. Stems clumped, erect to leaning, 2-5' (60-150 cm) tall, it round, rough
DESCRIPTION: unbranched, covered with radiating clumps of short, stiff hairs giving the base a with
texture. tapered very point, typically drooping at a right angle to the petiole. Lower leaves are heart-shaped; lobes-these
solid, mostly Bark is stringy. Leaves alternate, 2.5-6" (6-15 cm) long, wide at
an elongated, they become more elongated and triangular, bulged at the base or with 2 short divergent nearly flat above
upward in full sun. The surface is gray-green, roughened by stiff, clumped hairs. Midvein flat both
and longer slightly protruding below; secondary veins (several of which arise from the base) are nearly on
sides. Petiole 50-90% of blade length, not channeled or with a faint groove. Inflorescence a loose cluster at
the apex or the tips of short upper branches, with reduced leaves. Flowers (early summer to fall) purple to
light pink, 1.5-2.5" (4-6 cm) across. Petals 5, overlapping at the base, broad and wavy at the end, with many
prominent veins. Numerous narrowly lanceolate or linear bracts are immediately behind the 5 triangular calyx
lobes. The stigma column is thick, protruding 0.5-1.2" (13-30 cm), tapered, yellow, with short filaments along
its length, the tip with 5 red stigmas. Fruit a 5-celled capsule, roundish and slightly flattened, the surface
stiff-hairy, with one seed per cell.
HABITAT: Salt marshes and other wetlands near the coast, in full sun. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender leafy tips, flowers, and flower buds are edible from late spring through early autumn,
but the surfaces of all parts have stiff hairs giving them a rough, granular texture that is especially unpleasant
on the greens. Even the flower petals feel gritty. The buds are the best part, but they are tiny. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This plant is not nearly as good an edible as most of the other large mallows listed here. There
are reports of the roots being used like those of marshmallow; I have not tried this myself. This plant is also
found in Eurasia, where it is rare due to habitat loss. AKA saltmarsh mallow, and when the American popula-
tions are separated from the Eurasian, Kosteletzkya virginica.
628
BASAL LEAVES ASSENT, 12 Seashore mallow 1 1 1 Malvaceae (Mallow family) Kosteletzkya pentacarpos Chest-high seashore plant with grayish, rough-hairy stems central and column. long- pointed QUICK CHECK: leaves; large, showy, 5-petaled pink flowers with a thick, yellow ID difficulty 1. Perennial. Stems clumped, erect to leaning, 2-5' (60-150 cm) tall, it round, rough DESCRIPTION: unbranched, covered with radiating clumps of short, stiff hairs giving the base a with texture. tapered very point, typically drooping at a right angle to the petiole. Lower leaves are heart-shaped; lobes-these solid, mostly Bark is stringy. Leaves alternate, 2.5-6" (6-15 cm) long, wide at an elongated, they become more elongated and triangular, bulged at the base or with 2 short divergent nearly flat above upward in full sun. The surface is gray-green, roughened by stiff, clumped hairs. Midvein flat both and longer slightly protruding below; secondary veins (several of which arise from the base) are nearly on sides. Petiole 50-90% of blade length, not channeled or with a faint groove. Inflorescence a loose cluster at the apex or the tips of short upper branches, with reduced leaves. Flowers (early summer to fall) purple to light pink, 1.5-2.5" (4-6 cm) across. Petals 5, overlapping at the base, broad and wavy at the end, with many prominent veins. Numerous narrowly lanceolate or linear bracts are immediately behind the 5 triangular calyx lobes. The stigma column is thick, protruding 0.5-1.2" (13-30 cm), tapered, yellow, with short filaments along its length, the tip with 5 red stigmas. Fruit a 5-celled capsule, roundish and slightly flattened, the surface stiff-hairy, with one seed per cell. HABITAT: Salt marshes and other wetlands near the coast, in full sun. Native. FOOD USE: Tender leafy tips, flowers, and flower buds are edible from late spring through early autumn, but the surfaces of all parts have stiff hairs giving them a rough, granular texture that is especially unpleasant on the greens. Even the flower petals feel gritty. The buds are the best part, but they are tiny. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This plant is not nearly as good an edible as most of the other large mallows listed here. There are reports of the roots being used like those of marshmallow; I have not tried this myself. This plant is also found in Eurasia, where it is rare due to habitat loss. AKA saltmarsh mallow, and when the American popula- tions are separated from the Eurasian, Kosteletzkya virginica. 628 