BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED
13 Marsh mallow
2
1
Althaea officinalis Malvaceae (Mallow family) 2
QUICK CHECK: Chest-high mallow of wetland margins with clumped, velvety stems,
velvety leaves, and pale flowers about an inch across, ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a large, gently tapered, light-colored, semi-fibrous tap-
root to 1.5" (4 cm) thick, the flesh whitish and very mucilaginous. Stems single or more
often in clumps of a few, 2-7' (60-210 cm) tall and 0.2-0.7" (5-18 mm) thick, straight,
erect at first but usually leaning at maturity, simple or branched sparsely and not widely,
the form taller than wide. Cross section is round. The surface is densely coated with short.
Very rare in
soft, grayish hair (as is almost every part of the plant). Bark is stringy. Shoots are purplish.
mapped area.
Leaves alternate, broadly ovate to triangular or shallowly 3-lobed (the center much longer
Occasional
than the side lobes), 2-4" (5-10 cm) long. The base is broadly notched or right-angled to
elsewhere.
the petiole. Lobes and tip are pointed. The surface is densely velvety-hairy, giving it a dull gray-green look.
Major veins palmate and pinnate, depressed above, running straight to lobe tips; veinlets are faintly depressed.
Margins coarsely and irregularly toothed. Petioles 20-50% of blade length, roughly D-shaped, not or faintly
channeled, downy. Stipules linear, sharp-tipped, soon falling off. Inflorescence usually 2 short-stalked, tight
clusters of 2-9 flowers from each upper leaf axil, each flower on a pedicel 4-10 mm. There are 6-9 narrowly
lanceolate bracts just behind the 5 ovate sepals. Flowers (midsummer to early fall) pale pink to white, 1-1.2"
(25-30 mm) across, the petals about as broad as long, broad at the tip and sometimes slightly notched. The
column is pinkish, to 9 mm long, the anthers maroon. Fruit wheel-shaped, 8-10 mm across, composed of
15-20 sections (carpels), pale green drying to brown, velvety, the sepals wrapping around it.
HABITAT: Disturbed margins of wetlands, especially brackish marshes. Introduced.
FOOD USE: The large root can be cooked and used as a vegetable. Shoots can be eaten raw or cooked in
late spring (I have not tried
them). Young greens are
rather tough and woolly, but
edible. Flowers and new green
fruits are available over a long
season and are good raw or
cooked. All parts are highly
mucilaginous.
COMMENTS: Yes, this is
the plant from which a fluffy
white confection was made
before they invented the fake
marshmallow stuff you can
buy today, which has nothing
to do with the plant. I have
never made real "marshmal- -
low," but I tried it once, and
it's delicious. John Kallas has
written extensively about the
process. This plant is very rare
in the wild in our region, but
many people call certain other
native mallows "marshmal-
low," inflating the perception
of its abundance. 1 have only
encountered one wild popu-
lation. Systematic botanical
copying must have occurred,
because North American
noras report this species as
way shorter thanit actually is
029
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED 13 Marsh mallow 2 1 Althaea officinalis Malvaceae (Mallow family) 2 QUICK CHECK: Chest-high mallow of wetland margins with clumped, velvety stems, velvety leaves, and pale flowers about an inch across, ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a large, gently tapered, light-colored, semi-fibrous tap- root to 1.5" (4 cm) thick, the flesh whitish and very mucilaginous. Stems single or more often in clumps of a few, 2-7' (60-210 cm) tall and 0.2-0.7" (5-18 mm) thick, straight, erect at first but usually leaning at maturity, simple or branched sparsely and not widely, the form taller than wide. Cross section is round. The surface is densely coated with short. Very rare in soft, grayish hair (as is almost every part of the plant). Bark is stringy. Shoots are purplish. mapped area. Leaves alternate, broadly ovate to triangular or shallowly 3-lobed (the center much longer Occasional than the side lobes), 2-4" (5-10 cm) long. The base is broadly notched or right-angled to elsewhere. the petiole. Lobes and tip are pointed. The surface is densely velvety-hairy, giving it a dull gray-green look. Major veins palmate and pinnate, depressed above, running straight to lobe tips; veinlets are faintly depressed. Margins coarsely and irregularly toothed. Petioles 20-50% of blade length, roughly D-shaped, not or faintly channeled, downy. Stipules linear, sharp-tipped, soon falling off. Inflorescence usually 2 short-stalked, tight clusters of 2-9 flowers from each upper leaf axil, each flower on a pedicel 4-10 mm. There are 6-9 narrowly lanceolate bracts just behind the 5 ovate sepals. Flowers (midsummer to early fall) pale pink to white, 1-1.2" (25-30 mm) across, the petals about as broad as long, broad at the tip and sometimes slightly notched. The column is pinkish, to 9 mm long, the anthers maroon. Fruit wheel-shaped, 8-10 mm across, composed of 15-20 sections (carpels), pale green drying to brown, velvety, the sepals wrapping around it. HABITAT: Disturbed margins of wetlands, especially brackish marshes. Introduced. FOOD USE: The large root can be cooked and used as a vegetable. Shoots can be eaten raw or cooked in late spring (I have not tried them). Young greens are rather tough and woolly, but edible. Flowers and new green fruits are available over a long season and are good raw or cooked. All parts are highly mucilaginous. COMMENTS: Yes, this is the plant from which a fluffy white confection was made before they invented the fake marshmallow stuff you can buy today, which has nothing to do with the plant. I have never made real "marshmal- - low," but I tried it once, and it's delicious. John Kallas has written extensively about the process. This plant is very rare in the wild in our region, but many people call certain other native mallows "marshmal- low," inflating the perception of its abundance. 1 have only encountered one wild popu- lation. Systematic botanical copying must have occurred, because North American noras report this species as way shorter thanit actually is 029 