BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED
15 Sea rocket
3
Cakile edentula Brassicaceae (Mustard family)
toothed QUICK CHECK: leaves. Widely branched mustard of beaches with small, succulent, sparsely
ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Succulent annual branching from the base, to 22" (56 cm)
spreading wider than tall or appearing to be toppled over, Stems hairless, long, often
zigzag, borne proportionately thick, smooth with gentle ridges and valleys. Branches succulent, solid,
anywhere on the stem. Leaves alternate, thick and fleshy, 0.8-3" (2-8 cm) frequent,
elliptic Midvein to spatulate in outline with a blunt-pointed tip, often cupped, the surface glossy, long, hairless, and
nearly flat above, offset by light color; other veins obscure and flat, Margins sometimes smooth.
usually with erratic, variably sized, blunt teeth or waves and often lobes. Petioles of lower leaves entire but of
blade length, deeply U-channeled, the edges sometimes inrolled; upper leaves are nearly sessile with 40-90% a long-
tapered base. Inflorescence a terminal raceme, with the pedicels thick and only diverging slightly from the
rachis. Flowers 5-6 mm across, white to light purple, with 4 petals not at right angles to each other. Fruit a
distinct pod 0.4-1" (1-2.5 cm) long shaped like an ice-cream cone held close to the rachis, with two one-seeded
segments divided by a constriction; the thicker outer section detaches to be dispersed by waves, while the
inner section remains attached.
RELATED EDIBLE: C. maritima is a close edible relative native to Europe, rarely established on our coast.
The leaves are deeply pinnately lobed.
HABITAT: Ocean beaches and some parts of the Great Lakes, growing
from the sand or gravel where there is often little other vegetation. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather ten-
der greens and stems as
a spicy vegetable, raw
or cooked. Spring to
early summer is best
but individual leaves
remain tender through
the growing season.
Conservation 2,
COMMENTS: The
flavor is pungent and
strong; on salty coasts
it tastes slightly salty,
but when growing inland
(such as along the Great
Lakes) it does not.
631
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED 15 Sea rocket 3 Cakile edentula Brassicaceae (Mustard family) toothed QUICK CHECK: leaves. Widely branched mustard of beaches with small, succulent, sparsely ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Succulent annual branching from the base, to 22" (56 cm) spreading wider than tall or appearing to be toppled over, Stems hairless, long, often zigzag, borne proportionately thick, smooth with gentle ridges and valleys. Branches succulent, solid, anywhere on the stem. Leaves alternate, thick and fleshy, 0.8-3" (2-8 cm) frequent, elliptic Midvein to spatulate in outline with a blunt-pointed tip, often cupped, the surface glossy, long, hairless, and nearly flat above, offset by light color; other veins obscure and flat, Margins sometimes smooth. usually with erratic, variably sized, blunt teeth or waves and often lobes. Petioles of lower leaves entire but of blade length, deeply U-channeled, the edges sometimes inrolled; upper leaves are nearly sessile with 40-90% a long- tapered base. Inflorescence a terminal raceme, with the pedicels thick and only diverging slightly from the rachis. Flowers 5-6 mm across, white to light purple, with 4 petals not at right angles to each other. Fruit a distinct pod 0.4-1" (1-2.5 cm) long shaped like an ice-cream cone held close to the rachis, with two one-seeded segments divided by a constriction; the thicker outer section detaches to be dispersed by waves, while the inner section remains attached. RELATED EDIBLE: C. maritima is a close edible relative native to Europe, rarely established on our coast. The leaves are deeply pinnately lobed. HABITAT: Ocean beaches and some parts of the Great Lakes, growing from the sand or gravel where there is often little other vegetation. Native. FOOD USE: Gather ten- der greens and stems as a spicy vegetable, raw or cooked. Spring to early summer is best but individual leaves remain tender through the growing season. Conservation 2, COMMENTS: The flavor is pungent and strong; on salty coasts it tastes slightly salty, but when growing inland (such as along the Great Lakes) it does not. 631 