BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED
14 Cocklebur
2
(Composite
family)
Xanthium
strumarium
Asteraceae
CHECK: Thick-stemmed, leaning to spreading herb with thick, rough leaves and
football-shaped QUICK burs covered with hooked hairs. ID difficulty 1.
Robust annual with a strong, somewhat unpleasant odor. Stem single, some- to
DESCRIPTION: m) long and 0.7" (18 mm) thick; sometimes erect with no major branches, prostrate,
40" (1 prominently branched near the base and spreading or bushy, sometimes twisted or
times semi-erect. Lower stem stiff, tough, rough, grayish; often
decumbent, or on the soil. Stem above the base is green to maroon, stiff, with a pithy center; the flattened surface
has curved scattered, to repose stiff, appressed hairs. Mid to upper stem obscurely angled with usually 5 somewhat
faces, which may have a small channel. Branches mostly at 60-80° angles. Leaves few and large, alternate,
3-7" (8-18 cm) long, about equally wide, usually with 3 major lobes, the side lobes blunt-tipped, the middle
lobe with an elongated tip. The blade is moderately thick and sandpapery to the touch from stiff hairs; the
surface is dull, lighter green and often yellowing, not glossy. Major veins protrude below but are not depressed
above. Margins have erratic large teeth and small lobes. Petioles 60-80% of blade length, thick, tough, solid,
with stiff appressed hairs, nearly rounded with a very small channel. Inflorescence (mid summer to fall) a
dense raceme of composite heads from leaf axils, female at the base and male at the tip. Female heads are
much larger and contain only 2 florets, but neither gender is showy. Fruit is a football-shaped bur about 0.9"
(23 mm) long covered with hooked bristles and stiff hairs, the tip with 2 enlarged hooks curved inward like
a beetle's pinchers. The flesh is very tough and leathery. Inside are two narrow, elongated, flattened kernels
(flatter on one side), striated when dry.
HABITAT: Open, sunny, well-drained sites. Natural habitat is river floodplains, washes, and sandy shores;
now also abundant in disturbed soil as a weed. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather ripe brown burs in late summer or fall. Allow them to dry, then clip the base end with
a wire cutter and squeeze the seed out with pliers, or let it fall out. Eat like sunflower nuts. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: These seeds were an important winter food source for the only parrot native to the eastern
US, Conuropsis carolinensis, before it was hunted to extinction. Cocklebur
kernels taste good but are laborious to extract.
630
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED 14 Cocklebur 2 (Composite family) Xanthium strumarium Asteraceae CHECK: Thick-stemmed, leaning to spreading herb with thick, rough leaves and football-shaped QUICK burs covered with hooked hairs. ID difficulty 1. Robust annual with a strong, somewhat unpleasant odor. Stem single, some- to DESCRIPTION: m) long and 0.7" (18 mm) thick; sometimes erect with no major branches, prostrate, 40" (1 prominently branched near the base and spreading or bushy, sometimes twisted or times semi-erect. Lower stem stiff, tough, rough, grayish; often decumbent, or on the soil. Stem above the base is green to maroon, stiff, with a pithy center; the flattened surface has curved scattered, to repose stiff, appressed hairs. Mid to upper stem obscurely angled with usually 5 somewhat faces, which may have a small channel. Branches mostly at 60-80° angles. Leaves few and large, alternate, 3-7" (8-18 cm) long, about equally wide, usually with 3 major lobes, the side lobes blunt-tipped, the middle lobe with an elongated tip. The blade is moderately thick and sandpapery to the touch from stiff hairs; the surface is dull, lighter green and often yellowing, not glossy. Major veins protrude below but are not depressed above. Margins have erratic large teeth and small lobes. Petioles 60-80% of blade length, thick, tough, solid, with stiff appressed hairs, nearly rounded with a very small channel. Inflorescence (mid summer to fall) a dense raceme of composite heads from leaf axils, female at the base and male at the tip. Female heads are much larger and contain only 2 florets, but neither gender is showy. Fruit is a football-shaped bur about 0.9" (23 mm) long covered with hooked bristles and stiff hairs, the tip with 2 enlarged hooks curved inward like a beetle's pinchers. The flesh is very tough and leathery. Inside are two narrow, elongated, flattened kernels (flatter on one side), striated when dry. HABITAT: Open, sunny, well-drained sites. Natural habitat is river floodplains, washes, and sandy shores; now also abundant in disturbed soil as a weed. Native. FOOD USE: Gather ripe brown burs in late summer or fall. Allow them to dry, then clip the base end with a wire cutter and squeeze the seed out with pliers, or let it fall out. Eat like sunflower nuts. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: These seeds were an important winter food source for the only parrot native to the eastern US, Conuropsis carolinensis, before it was hunted to extinction. Cocklebur kernels taste good but are laborious to extract. 630 