BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED
17 Epazote
Chenopodium ambrosioides family Amaranthaceae
QUICK CHECK: Knee to waist-high aromatic herb with many branches and small iar
Leolate leaves with small lobes; flowers tiny and unshowy. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Aromatic perennial from a stout taproot. Stems single, 2-4) (60-120 cm)
tall, and 4-12 mm thick, solid, tough,
almost woody, often curvy, the surface
brown, splitting in strips, hairless, with many small ridges
Branches numerous and compound, often widely spreading
from near the base on full-sun plants; smaller and strongly
ascending where crowded or in shade. Leaves alternate,
extremely variable in size, 0.5-3.5" (13-90 mm) long. mostly
lanceolate, tapered to the base, the blades thin and hair-
less, the surface finely bumpy. Midvein offset by light color,
slightly raised in a valley or depressed above. Secondary
veins 5-9 per side, at broad angles, faintly depressed above
and much protruding below, terminating in tooth tips. Mar-
gins have several variably spaced and sized large teeth or small
lobes pointing toward the tip; the tapered base is toothless.
Petioles 5-15% of blade length on lower leaves; upper leaves
are nearly sessile. Inflorescence numerous spikes from the
upper leaf axils, often discontinuous. Flowers tiny, unshowy,
sessile; ripening to a dry fruit containing a single seed.
HABITAT: Sunny to semi-shaded sites in river floodplains,
also disturbed forest edges, young woods, steep slopes, and
crop field margins. Possibly introduced.
FOOD USE: The dried or fresh leaves are used as a season-
ing traditionally with beans in Mexican cuisine.
COMMENTS: This herb is easy to recognize by its aroma
and is common in much of our area. The leaves have anti-
compounds which are toxic in large doses. Epazote
worm also reduces the flatulence caused by beans. AKA Mexican
tea, Dysphania ambrosioides.
633
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED 17 Epazote Chenopodium ambrosioides family Amaranthaceae QUICK CHECK: Knee to waist-high aromatic herb with many branches and small iar Leolate leaves with small lobes; flowers tiny and unshowy. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Aromatic perennial from a stout taproot. Stems single, 2-4) (60-120 cm) tall, and 4-12 mm thick, solid, tough, almost woody, often curvy, the surface brown, splitting in strips, hairless, with many small ridges Branches numerous and compound, often widely spreading from near the base on full-sun plants; smaller and strongly ascending where crowded or in shade. Leaves alternate, extremely variable in size, 0.5-3.5" (13-90 mm) long. mostly lanceolate, tapered to the base, the blades thin and hair- less, the surface finely bumpy. Midvein offset by light color, slightly raised in a valley or depressed above. Secondary veins 5-9 per side, at broad angles, faintly depressed above and much protruding below, terminating in tooth tips. Mar- gins have several variably spaced and sized large teeth or small lobes pointing toward the tip; the tapered base is toothless. Petioles 5-15% of blade length on lower leaves; upper leaves are nearly sessile. Inflorescence numerous spikes from the upper leaf axils, often discontinuous. Flowers tiny, unshowy, sessile; ripening to a dry fruit containing a single seed. HABITAT: Sunny to semi-shaded sites in river floodplains, also disturbed forest edges, young woods, steep slopes, and crop field margins. Possibly introduced. FOOD USE: The dried or fresh leaves are used as a season- ing traditionally with beans in Mexican cuisine. COMMENTS: This herb is easy to recognize by its aroma and is common in much of our area. The leaves have anti- compounds which are toxic in large doses. Epazote worm also reduces the flatulence caused by beans. AKA Mexican tea, Dysphania ambrosioides. 633 