BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE
16 Tumble ringwing
1
Cycloloma atriplicifolium family Amaranthaceae
QUICK CHECK: Low, stout, bushy tumbleweed growing on sand, with many tiny winged
fruits, 28" (70 cm) tall, erect to leaning but with many widely wider than spread- tall.
losing its leaves by fruiting. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: from Annual the base, to curving upward to form a bushy tumbleweed tapering quickly;
Stems and branches small, soft hairs. Leaves alternate, 0.8-2.5" (2-6 long, scurfy, oblanceolate the tips broadly with
ing branches are thick at the base in proportion to their length, cm)
they are finely ridged and have and often curling, flat, slightly succulent, hairless but often with few
a tapered base, ascending claw. Midvein flat to slightly raised above; other veins obscure. Margins Petiole wavy to 15% a of
angled with and a sharp small lobes at right angles, these sharp-pointed with light-colored claw tips. the flowers
usually blade length; well-spaced, some each with a single, tiny, lanceolate bract underneath. Flowers greenish, unshowy, flattened,
large teeth leaves are sessile. Inflorescence numerous small, terminal, compound spikes, tiny,
with 5 tepals joined at the base. Seeds single, dark, round, slightly
surrounded by an irregular, thin, frilly wing radiating on all sides like a wheel.
HABITAT: Well-drained sandy disturbed soil in full sun, such as riverbanks,
sandy prairies, roadsides, and beaches. Highly associated with clammy-
weed (p. 643). More common westward and along coasts and major river
systems. Native.
FOOD USE: Cut dry plants in late summer, rub over a tub to collect seeds.
Dry, rub, winnow, then use as a cooked grain. The chaff is highly aromatic
and the seeds have an odd flavor. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: We call this species "sand pile plant" because it covers every
old heap of dredged sand along the upper Mississippi River. It is not a very
practical food plant for the modern forager, but has served as a staple in the
past. Sand sticking to the surface and getting into the seeds is a major problem.
632
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE 16 Tumble ringwing 1 Cycloloma atriplicifolium family Amaranthaceae QUICK CHECK: Low, stout, bushy tumbleweed growing on sand, with many tiny winged fruits, 28" (70 cm) tall, erect to leaning but with many widely wider than spread- tall. losing its leaves by fruiting. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: from Annual the base, to curving upward to form a bushy tumbleweed tapering quickly; Stems and branches small, soft hairs. Leaves alternate, 0.8-2.5" (2-6 long, scurfy, oblanceolate the tips broadly with ing branches are thick at the base in proportion to their length, cm) they are finely ridged and have and often curling, flat, slightly succulent, hairless but often with few a tapered base, ascending claw. Midvein flat to slightly raised above; other veins obscure. Margins Petiole wavy to 15% a of angled with and a sharp small lobes at right angles, these sharp-pointed with light-colored claw tips. the flowers usually blade length; well-spaced, some each with a single, tiny, lanceolate bract underneath. Flowers greenish, unshowy, flattened, large teeth leaves are sessile. Inflorescence numerous small, terminal, compound spikes, tiny, with 5 tepals joined at the base. Seeds single, dark, round, slightly surrounded by an irregular, thin, frilly wing radiating on all sides like a wheel. HABITAT: Well-drained sandy disturbed soil in full sun, such as riverbanks, sandy prairies, roadsides, and beaches. Highly associated with clammy- weed (p. 643). More common westward and along coasts and major river systems. Native. FOOD USE: Cut dry plants in late summer, rub over a tub to collect seeds. Dry, rub, winnow, then use as a cooked grain. The chaff is highly aromatic and the seeds have an odd flavor. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: We call this species "sand pile plant" because it covers every old heap of dredged sand along the upper Mississippi River. It is not a very practical food plant for the modern forager, but has served as a staple in the past. Sand sticking to the surface and getting into the seeds is a major problem. 632 