BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED
3
2
[]
FH-186
18 Maple-leaved goosefoot
Chenopodium
hybridum
family
Amaranthaceae
CHECK: Tall, musky-scented herb, the leaves with a few very difficulty large teeth 2. or small
lobes; QUICK flowers unshowy in large, sparse panicles; fruits tiny. ID
Branchy, erect annual with a strong musky scent, especially when young. solid.
DESCRIPTION: (60-210 cm) tall, to 0.6" (15 mm) thick, strongly ridged, hairless, green, a few, often
Stem 2-7' alternate, 2-8" (5-20 cm) long, flat, ovate or triangular in outline with between
very large, The prominent, is sharp and long-pointed; the base widens abruptly, often at a right angle, and and is veinlets sometimes
Leaves sharp teeth or small lobes with broad, rounded sinuses
them. indented. Surface tip lacks the whitish powder often seen on lambsquarters. Secondary veins are
depressed. Petioles 20-60% of blade length, grooved on top, narrow, not winged. Inflorescence large, compound- in
branching, terminal and axillary panicles, longer than wide, the branches at very wide angles, terminating
small, tight, ball-like flower clusters that are widely separated. Flowers (late summer) tiny, inconspicuous,
with sepals but no petals, the parts greenish and white, often with a red tint. Seeds roundish but somewhat
flattened, 1-2 mm across (about twice the diameter of lambsquarters seeds), dark brown to nearly black,
encased in a thin layer of greenish stuff.
CONFUSING PLANTS: When young, leaves
resemble those of strawberry spinach (p. 350),
a relative that is also edible-but young straw-
berry spinach has a rosette, while maple-leaf
goosefoot never does.
HABITAT: Disturbed, well-drained soil in
wooded areas: logged sites, roadsides, burns,
blowdowns. Also a weed of yards, gardens, and
empty lots. Most common in light shade. Native.
FOOD USE: Eat tender leafy tips raw or cooked;
they can be collected from late spring through
summer. Leaf blades remain palatable even
as the stems toughen and mature. The musky
scent goes away with cooking. The seeds are
larger than those of other goosefoots and easier
to clean and winnow. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This less-known relative of
lambsquarters is equally good as a potherb
and perhaps a better candidate for collecting
seed. This species is native to North America
and Eurasia. It pops up after disturbances in
forest ecosystems. AKA Chenopodium simplex,
hybridum Chenopodium gigantospermum, Chenopodiastrum
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED 3 2 [] FH-186 18 Maple-leaved goosefoot Chenopodium hybridum family Amaranthaceae CHECK: Tall, musky-scented herb, the leaves with a few very difficulty large teeth 2. or small lobes; QUICK flowers unshowy in large, sparse panicles; fruits tiny. ID Branchy, erect annual with a strong musky scent, especially when young. solid. DESCRIPTION: (60-210 cm) tall, to 0.6" (15 mm) thick, strongly ridged, hairless, green, a few, often Stem 2-7' alternate, 2-8" (5-20 cm) long, flat, ovate or triangular in outline with between very large, The prominent, is sharp and long-pointed; the base widens abruptly, often at a right angle, and and is veinlets sometimes Leaves sharp teeth or small lobes with broad, rounded sinuses them. indented. Surface tip lacks the whitish powder often seen on lambsquarters. Secondary veins are depressed. Petioles 20-60% of blade length, grooved on top, narrow, not winged. Inflorescence large, compound- in branching, terminal and axillary panicles, longer than wide, the branches at very wide angles, terminating small, tight, ball-like flower clusters that are widely separated. Flowers (late summer) tiny, inconspicuous, with sepals but no petals, the parts greenish and white, often with a red tint. Seeds roundish but somewhat flattened, 1-2 mm across (about twice the diameter of lambsquarters seeds), dark brown to nearly black, encased in a thin layer of greenish stuff. CONFUSING PLANTS: When young, leaves resemble those of strawberry spinach (p. 350), a relative that is also edible-but young straw- berry spinach has a rosette, while maple-leaf goosefoot never does. HABITAT: Disturbed, well-drained soil in wooded areas: logged sites, roadsides, burns, blowdowns. Also a weed of yards, gardens, and empty lots. Most common in light shade. Native. FOOD USE: Eat tender leafy tips raw or cooked; they can be collected from late spring through summer. Leaf blades remain palatable even as the stems toughen and mature. The musky scent goes away with cooking. The seeds are larger than those of other goosefoots and easier to clean and winnow. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This less-known relative of lambsquarters is equally good as a potherb and perhaps a better candidate for collecting seed. This species is native to North America and Eurasia. It pops up after disturbances in forest ecosystems. AKA Chenopodium simplex, hybridum Chenopodium gigantospermum, Chenopodiastrum 