BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED
19 Showy evening primrose
1
2
Oenothera
speciosa
Onagraceae (Evening primrose family)
QUICK CHECK: Low colonial plant of open areas, with erratically toothed gray-green
leaves and large pinkish flowers in small clusters. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by rhizomes. Stems weakly erect to decumbent or
sprawling with a few branches, 6-22" (15-56 cm) tall and 2-5 mm thick, slightly zigzag.
round, tough and brown with a flaky surface near the base, green distally, solid. densely
coated with fine, soft, appressed hairs. Leaves alternate, 1.2-3" (3-8 cm) long, usually sessile but occasionally
on petioles to 30% of blade length, mostly lanceolate, the base tapered and the tip sharp to blunt-pointed. The
surfaces are dull grayish-green and soft-hairy on both sides. Midvein light in color. nearly flat above; second-
ary veins are 3-4 per side, faint, and nearly flat above. Margins occasionally entire but more often wavy or
with scattered, erratic teeth (ranging from small to large) and occasional small lobes; there is sometimes a
pair of longer, narrow lobes near the leaf base. Inflorescence small clusters (rarely more than 3) from upper
leaf axils, each flower with one bract, blooming (late spring to fall) one per cluster at a time, open during the
day. Flowers 2-3" (5-8 cm) across; the 4 broad, overlapped petais are notched slightly at the tip with wavy or
ragged-scalloped margins. They are whitish with prominent veins radiating from the yellowish base, darkening
to pink. There are 4 long narrow pointed, yellow-pink sepais strongly curled back in bloom. The anthers are
long and brown, wrinkly. and perpendicular to the filament; the stigma has 4 long lobes. Flower buds to 1.3" (33 mm)
long, tapered at the base and more gradually to a
pointed tip, the outside covered with soft hairs.
Pod has 4 large and 4 small wings and holds many
small seeds.
HABITAT: Dry, often rocky, poor soil in full sun.
Native. but widely planted as an ornamental. 8
FOOD USE: The tender leafy stem tips, flower
buds, and flowers can all be eaten raw or cooked.
They have a little bit of the irritating quality typi-
cal of the evening primrose genus, so are better
cooked. The best time to get them is in spring
and early summer, but good nibbles can be found
from April through early autumn. Conservation 1.
RELATED EDIBLES: There are numerous mem-
bers of the genus Oenothera. These are safe to
try, and can be eaten to the extent that they are
pleasant. but many are strong flavored or tough.
COMMENTS: One of the most commonly noted
wildflowers of dry roadsides and meadows from
Missouri south and west, blooming heavily in
early summer but
occasionally through
autumn. The flow-
grow preposter-
ously large for such
a small plant. Showy
evening primrose is
easy to spot, easy to
dentify, and abun-
dan: AKA Mexican
mrose, pinkladies.
635
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED 19 Showy evening primrose 1 2 Oenothera speciosa Onagraceae (Evening primrose family) QUICK CHECK: Low colonial plant of open areas, with erratically toothed gray-green leaves and large pinkish flowers in small clusters. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by rhizomes. Stems weakly erect to decumbent or sprawling with a few branches, 6-22" (15-56 cm) tall and 2-5 mm thick, slightly zigzag. round, tough and brown with a flaky surface near the base, green distally, solid. densely coated with fine, soft, appressed hairs. Leaves alternate, 1.2-3" (3-8 cm) long, usually sessile but occasionally on petioles to 30% of blade length, mostly lanceolate, the base tapered and the tip sharp to blunt-pointed. The surfaces are dull grayish-green and soft-hairy on both sides. Midvein light in color. nearly flat above; second- ary veins are 3-4 per side, faint, and nearly flat above. Margins occasionally entire but more often wavy or with scattered, erratic teeth (ranging from small to large) and occasional small lobes; there is sometimes a pair of longer, narrow lobes near the leaf base. Inflorescence small clusters (rarely more than 3) from upper leaf axils, each flower with one bract, blooming (late spring to fall) one per cluster at a time, open during the day. Flowers 2-3" (5-8 cm) across; the 4 broad, overlapped petais are notched slightly at the tip with wavy or ragged-scalloped margins. They are whitish with prominent veins radiating from the yellowish base, darkening to pink. There are 4 long narrow pointed, yellow-pink sepais strongly curled back in bloom. The anthers are long and brown, wrinkly. and perpendicular to the filament; the stigma has 4 long lobes. Flower buds to 1.3" (33 mm) long, tapered at the base and more gradually to a pointed tip, the outside covered with soft hairs. Pod has 4 large and 4 small wings and holds many small seeds. HABITAT: Dry, often rocky, poor soil in full sun. Native. but widely planted as an ornamental. 8 FOOD USE: The tender leafy stem tips, flower buds, and flowers can all be eaten raw or cooked. They have a little bit of the irritating quality typi- cal of the evening primrose genus, so are better cooked. The best time to get them is in spring and early summer, but good nibbles can be found from April through early autumn. Conservation 1. RELATED EDIBLES: There are numerous mem- bers of the genus Oenothera. These are safe to try, and can be eaten to the extent that they are pleasant. but many are strong flavored or tough. COMMENTS: One of the most commonly noted wildflowers of dry roadsides and meadows from Missouri south and west, blooming heavily in early summer but occasionally through autumn. The flow- grow preposter- ously large for such a small plant. Showy evening primrose is easy to spot, easy to dentify, and abun- dan: AKA Mexican mrose, pinkladies. 635 