BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE
20 Canada thistle
38m3 61 FH-333
Cirsium arvense Asteraceae (Composite family)
QUICK CHECK: Colonial thistle with slender stems, shallowly lobed leaves without stiff
hairs, and small (for a thistle) pink-purple heads. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by rhizome to form colonies, the plants much taller
than wide. Root system of thick, fleshy roots and rhizomes to 0.6" (15 mm) thick, vertical for
3-10" (8-25 cm), then turning horizontal to spread and send up new crowns. Stems single,
3-6' (1-2 m) tall, up to 0.8" (2 cm) thick, strongly grooved, erect, straight with little taper,
hairless when young but becoming hairy, hollow, branching only in the upper third, the
branches ascending. Leaves alternate, sessile, to 12" (30 cm) long, narrowly elliptic in outline, the margins lobed,
usually shallowly, and extremely ruffled, with sharp spines. Surface usually hairless above, often covered with
whitish wool below. Midvein prominently offset by light color, flat to faintly raised in a valley above; secondary
veins are slightly depressed. Inflorescence a loose terminal panicle of 3-10 heads, with a reduced leaf at the
base of each branch. Heads roundish to egg-shaped at first, elongated in bloom and constricted beneath the
spreading florets, 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) across in bloom, covered with numerous layered ovate bracts tipped
with a reddish zone. Plants are either male or female. Florets (mid to late summer) light purple to pink (rarely
white), long and thin (hair-like), the male florets 0.4-0.6" (10-15 cm), the female 0.7-1" (18-25 cm). Fruit a
brown seed attached to a tan parachute.
HABITAT: Fields, roadsides, pastures, meadows,
stream banks, disturbed open areas in woodland. I
FOOD USE: Rhizome tips are unarmed, very tender,
and delicious. If you put plywood over a thick Canada
thistle colony in spring, rhizomes (or shoots) will crawl
along beneath it looking for light. The youngest shoots,
when still pushing through mulch, make an excellent
vegetable. These will have developed thorns only on
the very tip, which can be snipped off. Green shoots
are good raw or
cooked after being
carefully peeled.
COMMENTS:
This is one of the
few thistles that
spreads by rhi-
zome. The edible
parts are smaller
than those of other
thistles and small
specimens are not
worth your forag-
ing attention.
Canada thisth
shoot
636
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE 20 Canada thistle 38m3 61 FH-333 Cirsium arvense Asteraceae (Composite family) QUICK CHECK: Colonial thistle with slender stems, shallowly lobed leaves without stiff hairs, and small (for a thistle) pink-purple heads. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Perennial spreading by rhizome to form colonies, the plants much taller than wide. Root system of thick, fleshy roots and rhizomes to 0.6" (15 mm) thick, vertical for 3-10" (8-25 cm), then turning horizontal to spread and send up new crowns. Stems single, 3-6' (1-2 m) tall, up to 0.8" (2 cm) thick, strongly grooved, erect, straight with little taper, hairless when young but becoming hairy, hollow, branching only in the upper third, the branches ascending. Leaves alternate, sessile, to 12" (30 cm) long, narrowly elliptic in outline, the margins lobed, usually shallowly, and extremely ruffled, with sharp spines. Surface usually hairless above, often covered with whitish wool below. Midvein prominently offset by light color, flat to faintly raised in a valley above; secondary veins are slightly depressed. Inflorescence a loose terminal panicle of 3-10 heads, with a reduced leaf at the base of each branch. Heads roundish to egg-shaped at first, elongated in bloom and constricted beneath the spreading florets, 0.5-0.8" (13-20 mm) across in bloom, covered with numerous layered ovate bracts tipped with a reddish zone. Plants are either male or female. Florets (mid to late summer) light purple to pink (rarely white), long and thin (hair-like), the male florets 0.4-0.6" (10-15 cm), the female 0.7-1" (18-25 cm). Fruit a brown seed attached to a tan parachute. HABITAT: Fields, roadsides, pastures, meadows, stream banks, disturbed open areas in woodland. I FOOD USE: Rhizome tips are unarmed, very tender, and delicious. If you put plywood over a thick Canada thistle colony in spring, rhizomes (or shoots) will crawl along beneath it looking for light. The youngest shoots, when still pushing through mulch, make an excellent vegetable. These will have developed thorns only on the very tip, which can be snipped off. Green shoots are good raw or cooked after being carefully peeled. COMMENTS: This is one of the few thistles that spreads by rhi- zome. The edible parts are smaller than those of other thistles and small specimens are not worth your forag- ing attention. Canada thisth shoot 636 