BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED
21 Burnweed
1
Erechtites
hieracifolia
Asteraceae
QUICK composite CHECK: flowerheads Tall plant with numerous ragged-edged leaves, scent, family) and
(Composite
with florets mostly hidden by bracts. ID difficulty strong 2.
DESCRIPTION: solid, the surface Erect annual 1-8' (30-240 cm) tall. Stems to 0.7" (18
sized, with many deep grooves, the ridges between them mm) thick, round,
clustered covered with soft, spreading hairs. Shoot tips have spider-web evenly like spaced and
half. leaves. Branches numerous but small and strongly ascending, hairs between
to upper lanceolate Leaves alternate, 4-11" (10-28 long, thin, sessile (almost clasping), mostly in the
below. in outline. Both surfaces have fine, sparse hairs-especially the elliptic
broadly Midvein offset by whitish color above, depressed (especially distally). Secondary midvein veins
teeth between angled, and depressed above; veinlets less so. Margins usually shallowly pinnately lobed with numerous,
and on the lobes, these angled but not curving forward, with nipple-tips. Inflorescence smaller
branching terminal panicles somewhat longer than wide, the branches ridged, with numerous bracts, loosely
smaller ones linear and entire. Heads (mid to late summer) tubular with a bulged base, 0.7" (18 mm) long, the
often drooping, the green bracts numerous and linear. Ray florets light yellow, barely extending past the bracts
on the outside of the flower head-giving the impression, even at the peak of flowering, that the plant is just
about to bloom. Fruit a small. dark seed attached to a parachute, borne in fluffy balls.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Wild lettuces have milky sap and basal leaves; the stem leaves are fewer, less ruffled,
and less hairy.
HABITAT: Disturbed ground in forested ecosystems;
often becoming temporarily abundant after fires, floods,
construction, or logging. Also in urban and agricultural
areas. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather young leaves and tender tops in
early summer. Use sparingly in salads, boiled or steamed
as a potherb. or fried. The flavor and scent are strong.
Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This plant is also known as "fireweed," and
is sometimes confused with Epilobium angustifolium (the
other fireweed, p. 589)
simply because they
share common names;
they are not similar in
appearance. Burnweed
greens are tradition-
ally eaten in eastern
Asia, but their flavor
is strong, unique, and
not commonly liked by
the uninitiated. This
is one of our most
abundant and ubiqui-
tous weeds, and it is
becoming more com-
mon because it thrives
after herbicide appli-
cation. AKA pilewort,
fireweed.
637
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND LOBED 21 Burnweed 1 Erechtites hieracifolia Asteraceae QUICK composite CHECK: flowerheads Tall plant with numerous ragged-edged leaves, scent, family) and (Composite with florets mostly hidden by bracts. ID difficulty strong 2. DESCRIPTION: solid, the surface Erect annual 1-8' (30-240 cm) tall. Stems to 0.7" (18 sized, with many deep grooves, the ridges between them mm) thick, round, clustered covered with soft, spreading hairs. Shoot tips have spider-web evenly like spaced and half. leaves. Branches numerous but small and strongly ascending, hairs between to upper lanceolate Leaves alternate, 4-11" (10-28 long, thin, sessile (almost clasping), mostly in the below. in outline. Both surfaces have fine, sparse hairs-especially the elliptic broadly Midvein offset by whitish color above, depressed (especially distally). Secondary midvein veins teeth between angled, and depressed above; veinlets less so. Margins usually shallowly pinnately lobed with numerous, and on the lobes, these angled but not curving forward, with nipple-tips. Inflorescence smaller branching terminal panicles somewhat longer than wide, the branches ridged, with numerous bracts, loosely smaller ones linear and entire. Heads (mid to late summer) tubular with a bulged base, 0.7" (18 mm) long, the often drooping, the green bracts numerous and linear. Ray florets light yellow, barely extending past the bracts on the outside of the flower head-giving the impression, even at the peak of flowering, that the plant is just about to bloom. Fruit a small. dark seed attached to a parachute, borne in fluffy balls. CONFUSING PLANTS: Wild lettuces have milky sap and basal leaves; the stem leaves are fewer, less ruffled, and less hairy. HABITAT: Disturbed ground in forested ecosystems; often becoming temporarily abundant after fires, floods, construction, or logging. Also in urban and agricultural areas. Native. FOOD USE: Gather young leaves and tender tops in early summer. Use sparingly in salads, boiled or steamed as a potherb. or fried. The flavor and scent are strong. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This plant is also known as "fireweed," and is sometimes confused with Epilobium angustifolium (the other fireweed, p. 589) simply because they share common names; they are not similar in appearance. Burnweed greens are tradition- ally eaten in eastern Asia, but their flavor is strong, unique, and not commonly liked by the uninitiated. This is one of our most abundant and ubiqui- tous weeds, and it is becoming more com- mon because it thrives after herbicide appli- cation. AKA pilewort, fireweed. 637 