1tm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
1
Scarlet globe mallow
2
Sphaeralcea coccinea
Malvaceae (Mallow family)
QUICK CHECK: Low gray-green plant with deeply cut, hairy leaves and bright orange-
red flowers with 5 broad, shallowly notched petals. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial forming colonies by a deep horizontal root system, up to 20"
(50 cm) tall but often blooming when the plants are only 3-4" (8-10 cm). Vertical roots
at the stem base are tough and woody. Stems leaning to erect, 1-4 mm thick, tough in
the lower portions, round, covered with matted, spreading clumps of fine grayish hair.
Leaves alternate, 1-2.5" (2.5-6 cm) long, deeply cut into 3 main divisions, each of which is deeply incised, the
lobes elongate and pointed; margins have few to no teeth. Blades dull green above and gray-green below,
usually deeply folded, with fine gray hairs, dense on the underside, forming radiating speckle-like clumps on top.
Major veins few and depressed above, but often hard to see due to the creased blade. Stipules tiny, lanceolate
to linear, present on new growth but soon falling off. Petioles not channeled, roundish, about 40% of blade
length (longer near the base). Inflorescence a terminal raceme of a few crowded flowers, borne with bracts;
the pedicels are stout in relation to flower size. Flowers 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) across, the five petals bright orange
to red with narrow, yellow bases and broad, notched tips. The calyx is 5-lobed, the lobes triangular to ovate,
much shorter than the petals. The column is pale yellowish with numerous white stamens. Fruit a hairy, slightly
flattened wheel-like structure composed of 10-15 parts (carpels), each containing a single seed.
HABITAT: Dry prairies, especially on hills or where sandy. Native.
FOOD USE: Eat the tender greens, including buds and flowers, in summer, raw or cooked. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: The edible parts of this absolutely beautiful flower are all good, and more tender than they
look, although the plant's small stature and growing conditions mean that it is often dirty. AKA red false
mallow, cowboy's delight.
-
1tm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED 1 Scarlet globe mallow 2 Sphaeralcea coccinea Malvaceae (Mallow family) QUICK CHECK: Low gray-green plant with deeply cut, hairy leaves and bright orange- red flowers with 5 broad, shallowly notched petals. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial forming colonies by a deep horizontal root system, up to 20" (50 cm) tall but often blooming when the plants are only 3-4" (8-10 cm). Vertical roots at the stem base are tough and woody. Stems leaning to erect, 1-4 mm thick, tough in the lower portions, round, covered with matted, spreading clumps of fine grayish hair. Leaves alternate, 1-2.5" (2.5-6 cm) long, deeply cut into 3 main divisions, each of which is deeply incised, the lobes elongate and pointed; margins have few to no teeth. Blades dull green above and gray-green below, usually deeply folded, with fine gray hairs, dense on the underside, forming radiating speckle-like clumps on top. Major veins few and depressed above, but often hard to see due to the creased blade. Stipules tiny, lanceolate to linear, present on new growth but soon falling off. Petioles not channeled, roundish, about 40% of blade length (longer near the base). Inflorescence a terminal raceme of a few crowded flowers, borne with bracts; the pedicels are stout in relation to flower size. Flowers 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) across, the five petals bright orange to red with narrow, yellow bases and broad, notched tips. The calyx is 5-lobed, the lobes triangular to ovate, much shorter than the petals. The column is pale yellowish with numerous white stamens. Fruit a hairy, slightly flattened wheel-like structure composed of 10-15 parts (carpels), each containing a single seed. HABITAT: Dry prairies, especially on hills or where sandy. Native. FOOD USE: Eat the tender greens, including buds and flowers, in summer, raw or cooked. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: The edible parts of this absolutely beautiful flower are all good, and more tender than they look, although the plant's small stature and growing conditions mean that it is often dirty. AKA red false mallow, cowboy's delight. - 