BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
GROUP IS BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE
AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
contains several legumes and a few species from a few other edible families. plants Numer- may
This group non-edible legumes will key into this group. A few other check the
ous toxic or in the growing season after they have lost their basal leaves; with
bottom key here of late the stem for leaf scars and find the corresponding group among plants
basal leaves.
TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 38
The key is not your final answer!
Leaves palmately divided, each division deeply lobed.
Stem covered with fine, soft, grayish hair; flowers bright orange-red.
1. Scarlet globe mallow
or
Stem covered with sparse needle-like hair; flowers pale yellow.
2. Flower-of-an-hour
Leaves once compound with discrete leaflets.
Typical leaves with 3 leaflets.
Terminal (middle) leaflet with a distinct petiolule.
Stem unbranched, leaves densely packed almost into a whorl.
7. Point-leaf tick trefoil
or
Stem much branched, the leaves widely spaced.
8. Sweet clovers
or
Terminal (middle) leaflet sessile or nearly so.
Leaflets shaped like a folded paper heart; corolla yellow.
3. Yellow wood sorrel
Leaflets ovate, lanceolate, or elliptic; corolla not yellow.
Stem mostly hairless; corolla pink-purple.
4. Rocky Mountain beeplant
Stem covered with sticky-tipped hairs; corolla white.
5. Clammy weed
Leaves pinnately compound, many or all with more than 3 discrete leaflets.
Leaves with 9 or fewer leaflets.
or
or
Single-stemmed, delicate spring ephemeral less than 12" (30 cm) tall.
Stems tough, persistent, clumped; 1-4' (30-120 cm) tall.
6. Hot mermaid
or
Leaves with 9 or more leaflets.
9. Prairie clovers
Stems single, erect, spreading by rhizome to form colonies.
Stems clumped on a tough root crown, leaning or decumbent.
10. American licorice
Stems to 18" (46 cm) long; fruit plum-shaped and juicy.
Stems over 20" (50 cm) long; fruit a jointed, constricted pod.
11. Ground-plum milkvetch
Leaves palmately compound with usually more than 3 leaflets.
12. Alpine sweetvetch
Stem Stem more than 5' (150 cm) tall; leaflets toothed with strongly depressed veins.
less than 30" (75 cm) tall; leaflets entire with veins flat or nearly so.
13. Hemp
Stem erect and densely covered with long, erect hairs.
Leaves 2-3 times compound.
Stem leaning and sparsely covered with leaning to appressed hairs.
14. Prairie-turnip
Stem with scattered hairs but no bristles.
15. Tall breadroot
Stem with scattered spines or bristles.
16. Spikenard
17. Bristly sarsaparilla
638
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED GROUP IS BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED contains several legumes and a few species from a few other edible families. plants Numer- may This group non-edible legumes will key into this group. A few other check the ous toxic or in the growing season after they have lost their basal leaves; with bottom key here of late the stem for leaf scars and find the corresponding group among plants basal leaves. TENTATIVE IDENTIFICATION KEY TO GROUP 38 The key is not your final answer! Leaves palmately divided, each division deeply lobed. Stem covered with fine, soft, grayish hair; flowers bright orange-red. 1. Scarlet globe mallow or Stem covered with sparse needle-like hair; flowers pale yellow. 2. Flower-of-an-hour Leaves once compound with discrete leaflets. Typical leaves with 3 leaflets. Terminal (middle) leaflet with a distinct petiolule. Stem unbranched, leaves densely packed almost into a whorl. 7. Point-leaf tick trefoil or Stem much branched, the leaves widely spaced. 8. Sweet clovers or Terminal (middle) leaflet sessile or nearly so. Leaflets shaped like a folded paper heart; corolla yellow. 3. Yellow wood sorrel Leaflets ovate, lanceolate, or elliptic; corolla not yellow. Stem mostly hairless; corolla pink-purple. 4. Rocky Mountain beeplant Stem covered with sticky-tipped hairs; corolla white. 5. Clammy weed Leaves pinnately compound, many or all with more than 3 discrete leaflets. Leaves with 9 or fewer leaflets. or or Single-stemmed, delicate spring ephemeral less than 12" (30 cm) tall. Stems tough, persistent, clumped; 1-4' (30-120 cm) tall. 6. Hot mermaid or Leaves with 9 or more leaflets. 9. Prairie clovers Stems single, erect, spreading by rhizome to form colonies. Stems clumped on a tough root crown, leaning or decumbent. 10. American licorice Stems to 18" (46 cm) long; fruit plum-shaped and juicy. Stems over 20" (50 cm) long; fruit a jointed, constricted pod. 11. Ground-plum milkvetch Leaves palmately compound with usually more than 3 leaflets. 12. Alpine sweetvetch Stem Stem more than 5' (150 cm) tall; leaflets toothed with strongly depressed veins. less than 30" (75 cm) tall; leaflets entire with veins flat or nearly so. 13. Hemp Stem erect and densely covered with long, erect hairs. Leaves 2-3 times compound. Stem leaning and sparsely covered with leaning to appressed hairs. 14. Prairie-turnip Stem with scattered hairs but no bristles. 15. Tall breadroot Stem with scattered spines or bristles. 16. Spikenard 17. Bristly sarsaparilla 638 