BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
3
1
I
Flower-of-an-hour Hibiscus trionum Malvaceae (Mallow family)
hairs and leaves divided into dark-edged 3 blunt leaflets ridges. or
lobes, QUICK large CHECK: yellowish Low herb flowers with with needle maroon centers, the bud with
ID difficulty 1. Annual, usually less than 16" (40 cm) tall, branching widely often at resting right angles, on the
DESCRIPTION: often long and prominent, those near the base toward the inflores-
Most abundant
the branches few but is sparsely hairy near the base but conspicuously so Stems 2-4 mm
in the corn belt.
cences, the long, needle-like hairs. There is a small, dense deeply hairs 3-lobed run-
ground. The hairs plant needle-like and often arranged in clumps on raised bumps. narrow row of
thick, green, round, solid, each with node sparse, to the next node above, except on the lower stems. Leaves blunt sub-lobes. If
ning on one or two sides of If lobed, the major lobes are narrowed near the base with smaller, for the midvein,
compound, has scattered the needle-hairs; are the underside is sparsely hairy. Few veins evident, these slightly of
or ternately compound. leaflets all sessile, 0.7-1.8" (18-46 cm) long. Blades hairless above except depressed
which and protruding below, light in color. Margins untoothed and usually darkened. Petioles 80-140%
blade above length, straight, with scattered needle-hairs; there is a shallow channel lined with fine hairs. Stipules are
tiny. Flowers (summer) single, opening briefly in the morning, about 1.3" (33 mm) across, the pedicels about 1"
(2.5 cm) long. Flower bud inflated with 5 wide wings with hairy purple-brown edges; between these are 3-5 shorter
dark ridges, and between the ridges the sepals are veiny and nearly transparent. Calyx of 5 triangular sepals
fused at the base. Beneath the calyx is a whorl of numerous linear bracts 40% of its length, curving toward
the tip but not touching the sepals. Petals 5, broad, veiny, separate, pale yellow but maroon at the base. The
column and 5-lobed stigma are maroon, the anthers yellow-orange. After blooming the calyx closes to form a
papery husk around the very hairy 5-part capsule, which contains numerous seeds that ripen to dark brown.
HABITAT: Disturbed rich soil in full sun; crop fields, gardens, yards, construction sites. Introduced.
FOOD USE: All the tender new parts are edible raw or cooked from midsummer to early fall. Ripe seeds
can be used like poppy
seeds from late sum-
mer to early fall.
COMMENTS: Com-
mon and widespread,
this is one of our best
tasting mallow greens,
the only trouble being
the annoying hairs, and
the fact that they often
catch dirt. This might
have the prettiest
flower of any common
agricultural weed.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED 3 1 I Flower-of-an-hour Hibiscus trionum Malvaceae (Mallow family) hairs and leaves divided into dark-edged 3 blunt leaflets ridges. or lobes, QUICK large CHECK: yellowish Low herb flowers with with needle maroon centers, the bud with ID difficulty 1. Annual, usually less than 16" (40 cm) tall, branching widely often at resting right angles, on the DESCRIPTION: often long and prominent, those near the base toward the inflores- Most abundant the branches few but is sparsely hairy near the base but conspicuously so Stems 2-4 mm in the corn belt. cences, the long, needle-like hairs. There is a small, dense deeply hairs 3-lobed run- ground. The hairs plant needle-like and often arranged in clumps on raised bumps. narrow row of thick, green, round, solid, each with node sparse, to the next node above, except on the lower stems. Leaves blunt sub-lobes. If ning on one or two sides of If lobed, the major lobes are narrowed near the base with smaller, for the midvein, compound, has scattered the needle-hairs; are the underside is sparsely hairy. Few veins evident, these slightly of or ternately compound. leaflets all sessile, 0.7-1.8" (18-46 cm) long. Blades hairless above except depressed which and protruding below, light in color. Margins untoothed and usually darkened. Petioles 80-140% blade above length, straight, with scattered needle-hairs; there is a shallow channel lined with fine hairs. Stipules are tiny. Flowers (summer) single, opening briefly in the morning, about 1.3" (33 mm) across, the pedicels about 1" (2.5 cm) long. Flower bud inflated with 5 wide wings with hairy purple-brown edges; between these are 3-5 shorter dark ridges, and between the ridges the sepals are veiny and nearly transparent. Calyx of 5 triangular sepals fused at the base. Beneath the calyx is a whorl of numerous linear bracts 40% of its length, curving toward the tip but not touching the sepals. Petals 5, broad, veiny, separate, pale yellow but maroon at the base. The column and 5-lobed stigma are maroon, the anthers yellow-orange. After blooming the calyx closes to form a papery husk around the very hairy 5-part capsule, which contains numerous seeds that ripen to dark brown. HABITAT: Disturbed rich soil in full sun; crop fields, gardens, yards, construction sites. Introduced. FOOD USE: All the tender new parts are edible raw or cooked from midsummer to early fall. Ripe seeds can be used like poppy seeds from late sum- mer to early fall. COMMENTS: Com- mon and widespread, this is one of our best tasting mallow greens, the only trouble being the annoying hairs, and the fact that they often catch dirt. This might have the prettiest flower of any common agricultural weed. 