1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
3 Yellow wood sorrel
3
2
genus Oxalis (in part) family Oxalidaceae NG-338
QUICK the CHECK: Compound leaves with 3 identical heart-shaped leaflets
ID difficulty 1.
tip and folded or creased along the midvein; yellow flowers and banana-like conner pods,
DESCRIPTION: Small annuals. Stems single or clumped, 2-26" (5-56 cm) tall and
thick, delicate, rounded, solid, soft-hairy, erect or spreading to bushy. Leaves alternate 2-5 mm
below, often whorled where concentrated near the stem tip, ternately compound with
leaflets evenly distributed on all sides. Petioles proportionately very long, thin, rounded, not channeled, finely
hairy. Leaflets 4-12 mm long, all sessile and of the same size, toothless, angled at the base with 2 broad.
rounded lobes at the tip-like paper hearts attached at the point, creased and often deeply folded, the halves flat.
Surface hairless or nearly so above, soft-hairy on the margins and below. There are 3 or 5 major veins from the
base, flat or faintly raised on both sides. Inflorescence an umbel of 3-12 at the end of naked, axillary peduncles
longer than the petioles adjacent to them. Pedicels straight and much longer than the flower; in fruit they
become sharply bent at both ends. Flowers 5-10 mm across, bell-like with 5 ovate green sepals joined at the
base and 5 yellow petals, wider and spreading, often notched at the end. Fruit an elongated, green, 5-angled,
banana-shaped capsule; these explode upon maturity to project the numerous tiny seeds.
SPECIES: There are two common, widespread, annual, yellow-flowered wood sorrels. O. stricta is characteristic
of moist but well-drained soil in shade, such as yards, gardens, along house foundations, disturbed woods,
and moist fields. O. dillenii is smaller and thrives in drier soil and sunnier sites, such as sidewalk cracks and
lawns. Both are probably native.
FOOD USE: Gather greens and nibble any time of the growing season, or use them in soup or salad. It is
easiest to find tender growth in spring and early summer. The greens can be chopped in a blender and then
steeped in cold water to make a sour drink. The tiny banana-shaped pods, found from late summer onward.
make a fun snack. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: This is one of our most commonly eaten wild greens. Children love its sour, lemony flavor and
teach each other to recognize it. They are high in oxalic acid. (Wood sorrels; children have much lower levels.)
641
1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED 3 Yellow wood sorrel 3 2 genus Oxalis (in part) family Oxalidaceae NG-338 QUICK the CHECK: Compound leaves with 3 identical heart-shaped leaflets ID difficulty 1. tip and folded or creased along the midvein; yellow flowers and banana-like conner pods, DESCRIPTION: Small annuals. Stems single or clumped, 2-26" (5-56 cm) tall and thick, delicate, rounded, solid, soft-hairy, erect or spreading to bushy. Leaves alternate 2-5 mm below, often whorled where concentrated near the stem tip, ternately compound with leaflets evenly distributed on all sides. Petioles proportionately very long, thin, rounded, not channeled, finely hairy. Leaflets 4-12 mm long, all sessile and of the same size, toothless, angled at the base with 2 broad. rounded lobes at the tip-like paper hearts attached at the point, creased and often deeply folded, the halves flat. Surface hairless or nearly so above, soft-hairy on the margins and below. There are 3 or 5 major veins from the base, flat or faintly raised on both sides. Inflorescence an umbel of 3-12 at the end of naked, axillary peduncles longer than the petioles adjacent to them. Pedicels straight and much longer than the flower; in fruit they become sharply bent at both ends. Flowers 5-10 mm across, bell-like with 5 ovate green sepals joined at the base and 5 yellow petals, wider and spreading, often notched at the end. Fruit an elongated, green, 5-angled, banana-shaped capsule; these explode upon maturity to project the numerous tiny seeds. SPECIES: There are two common, widespread, annual, yellow-flowered wood sorrels. O. stricta is characteristic of moist but well-drained soil in shade, such as yards, gardens, along house foundations, disturbed woods, and moist fields. O. dillenii is smaller and thrives in drier soil and sunnier sites, such as sidewalk cracks and lawns. Both are probably native. FOOD USE: Gather greens and nibble any time of the growing season, or use them in soup or salad. It is easiest to find tender growth in spring and early summer. The greens can be chopped in a blender and then steeped in cold water to make a sour drink. The tiny banana-shaped pods, found from late summer onward. make a fun snack. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: This is one of our most commonly eaten wild greens. Children love its sour, lemony flavor and teach each other to recognize it. They are high in oxalic acid. (Wood sorrels; children have much lower levels.) 641 