1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
5 Clammy weed
3
2
Polanisia dodecandra
family Cleomaceae
QUICK CHECK: Shin to thigh-high bushy herb of open, sandy
strong-smelling, ID difficulty 1. with 3-part compound leaves, racemes, and elongated areas, upright sticky pods. and
DESCRIPTION: Annual, as wide as tall when growing in the open but taller than wide
in competition. The whole plant has a strong green-pepper odor. Stems to 40" (1 m) tall
and 0.8" (2 cm) thick, often leaning or falling over at maturity, solid, round, faintly and
gently ridged, light green, covered with short, sticky, gland-tipped hairs, often branching heavily near the
base, the branches spreading to weakly ascending at first, then turning more erect. Some branches are red-
brown on the upper side. Leaves alternate, ternately compound; near the top is an occasional simple leaf,
or one with 2 leaflets. (Bracts are simple.) Petiole 60-90% of terminal leaflet length, with a tiny groove on
top. Leaflets sessile, thin, elliptic to oval, entire, 0.2-0.8" (5-20 mm) long, the tips blunt to pointed but not
acuminate; the terminal leaflet is slightly larger. The surface has sparse, tiny hairs and glands. Midvein and
secondary veins are depressed above; veinlets are flat. Inflorescence a raceme with many simple bracts; this
could also be construed as individual flowers held erect on long, thin pedicels from the axils of simple upper
leaves. Flowers (summer) about 5 mm long with 4 sharp-tipped, cupped, ovate, purple-brown sepals and
4 white petals scarcely exceeding the sepals; the petals are narrow at the base and broad at the notched tip.
The long-protruding stamens are purplish-red. Pods green, 0.9-2" (23-50 long, shaped like a pea pod, the
walls thin and flexible, drying to light brown, containing 2 rows of roundish but slightly flattened brown seeds
2-3 mm in diameter. The pedicel is 45° to the stem but the pod is held vertically; both parts are sticky-hairy
CONFUSING PLANTS: Rocky Mountain beeplant has drooping pods and thicker, darker leaves.
HABITAT: Open, sandy. disturbed sites; riverbanks, sandbars, roadsides, construction sites, sandpits. Likely to
be found on any pile of sand near a major riverway, and strongly associated with tumble ringwing (p. 632). Native.
FOOD USE: The tender tops can be used raw or as a potherb, especially as a flavoring in stews. They are
most available in early to mid summer. Seeds can be boiled and eaten, whole or ground. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: For some reason this Indigenous culinary herb of the Southwest is little known as an edible. It
is usually reported in the literature to have an unpleasant scent, but the smell reminds people of green bel!
peppers, and I think the flavor goes well with red meat in a stew or pot roast Although sporadic in occurrence
due to its specialized habitat needs, this plant is widespread and locally abundant.
643
1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED 5 Clammy weed 3 2 Polanisia dodecandra family Cleomaceae QUICK CHECK: Shin to thigh-high bushy herb of open, sandy strong-smelling, ID difficulty 1. with 3-part compound leaves, racemes, and elongated areas, upright sticky pods. and DESCRIPTION: Annual, as wide as tall when growing in the open but taller than wide in competition. The whole plant has a strong green-pepper odor. Stems to 40" (1 m) tall and 0.8" (2 cm) thick, often leaning or falling over at maturity, solid, round, faintly and gently ridged, light green, covered with short, sticky, gland-tipped hairs, often branching heavily near the base, the branches spreading to weakly ascending at first, then turning more erect. Some branches are red- brown on the upper side. Leaves alternate, ternately compound; near the top is an occasional simple leaf, or one with 2 leaflets. (Bracts are simple.) Petiole 60-90% of terminal leaflet length, with a tiny groove on top. Leaflets sessile, thin, elliptic to oval, entire, 0.2-0.8" (5-20 mm) long, the tips blunt to pointed but not acuminate; the terminal leaflet is slightly larger. The surface has sparse, tiny hairs and glands. Midvein and secondary veins are depressed above; veinlets are flat. Inflorescence a raceme with many simple bracts; this could also be construed as individual flowers held erect on long, thin pedicels from the axils of simple upper leaves. Flowers (summer) about 5 mm long with 4 sharp-tipped, cupped, ovate, purple-brown sepals and 4 white petals scarcely exceeding the sepals; the petals are narrow at the base and broad at the notched tip. The long-protruding stamens are purplish-red. Pods green, 0.9-2" (23-50 long, shaped like a pea pod, the walls thin and flexible, drying to light brown, containing 2 rows of roundish but slightly flattened brown seeds 2-3 mm in diameter. The pedicel is 45° to the stem but the pod is held vertically; both parts are sticky-hairy CONFUSING PLANTS: Rocky Mountain beeplant has drooping pods and thicker, darker leaves. HABITAT: Open, sandy. disturbed sites; riverbanks, sandbars, roadsides, construction sites, sandpits. Likely to be found on any pile of sand near a major riverway, and strongly associated with tumble ringwing (p. 632). Native. FOOD USE: The tender tops can be used raw or as a potherb, especially as a flavoring in stews. They are most available in early to mid summer. Seeds can be boiled and eaten, whole or ground. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: For some reason this Indigenous culinary herb of the Southwest is little known as an edible. It is usually reported in the literature to have an unpleasant scent, but the smell reminds people of green bel! peppers, and I think the flavor goes well with red meat in a stew or pot roast Although sporadic in occurrence due to its specialized habitat needs, this plant is widespread and locally abundant. 643 