BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
2
2
2
Rocky mountain beeplant
Cleome serrulata
family Cleomaceae
QUICK CHECK: Erect, musky herb with 3-part compound leaves, the leaflets sessile
and entire; purple flowers and long, thin, hanging pods. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Erect annual 2-6' (60-180 cm) tall, with a strong, odd, musky scent. Plants
usually branching, sometimes very near the base, the branches ascending strongly. with
are Stems single, smooth, rounded, solid, tough, mostly hairless, glandular, lightly coated hairs
on thicker parts but often red on tops or branches. Sparse cobwebby are
often bloom, found green around the nodes on young growth. Leaves alternate, compound with three leaflets about equal
in size borne on very short petiolules. Leaflets 0.8-2" (2-5 cm) long, elliptic to lanceolate, entire, tapered to
a point on both ends, the tip with a hook or nipple. In full sun the leaflets are often folded up along the midvein,
with their tips oriented vertically. Surfaces have sparse hairs, especially below. Midveins strongly depressed
above and protruding below. Secondary veins numerous, 55° to the midvein, flat to faintly depressed above and
protruding below. Margins usually have tiny teeth, but these are hard to notice. Petioles 70-100% of terminal
leaflet length. Inflorescence dense terminal racemes to 10" (25 cm) long, the rachis sparsely hairy with 6-30
blooming flowers crowded in a short section, with numerous unopened buds at the tip. Pedicels thread-thin,
about 0.8" (2 cm) long, each with a narrowly lanceolate bract at the base. Bracts persist after unfertilized
flowers fall off, leaving the lower rachis crowded with tiny bracts. Flowers (summer) have 4 sepals fused to
their midpoint, ending in small triangular lobes, and 4 pink to light purple petals about 1 cm long. Petals are
similar in size but asymmetrically arranged. There are 6 radiating stamens protruding about twice the length
of the petals. Pod thin, often slightly curved, 1-2.5" (2.5-6 cm) long, green, cylindrical, slightly constricted
between the seeds, drooping. Seeds numerous, about 3 mm, slightly flattened, roundish with a slight coil.
HABITAT: Sunny, disturbed soils; steep slopes, washes, ravines, roadsides, construction sites, etc., especially
where sandy. Native.
FOOD USE: The tender young stems, leaves, and flowers are used as a seasoning or vegetable. Raw, they are
spicy-hot; cooking makes them milder. Leaflets remain tender long after the stems toughen. The ripe pods
can be collected and dried, then broken up to release the seeds, which can be sifted or winnowed to remove
the trash. The seeds can be ground and eaten or cooked as a porridge. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: Like many culinary herbs, beeplant is often considered to have a disagreeable odor by those who
don't use it. The smell is strong and unique, and the flavor is among the hottest of our wild edibles. Beeplant
is strikingly beautiful and rightfully popular as an ornamental. There are numerous other common names.
642
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED 2 2 2 Rocky mountain beeplant Cleome serrulata family Cleomaceae QUICK CHECK: Erect, musky herb with 3-part compound leaves, the leaflets sessile and entire; purple flowers and long, thin, hanging pods. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Erect annual 2-6' (60-180 cm) tall, with a strong, odd, musky scent. Plants usually branching, sometimes very near the base, the branches ascending strongly. with are Stems single, smooth, rounded, solid, tough, mostly hairless, glandular, lightly coated hairs on thicker parts but often red on tops or branches. Sparse cobwebby are often bloom, found green around the nodes on young growth. Leaves alternate, compound with three leaflets about equal in size borne on very short petiolules. Leaflets 0.8-2" (2-5 cm) long, elliptic to lanceolate, entire, tapered to a point on both ends, the tip with a hook or nipple. In full sun the leaflets are often folded up along the midvein, with their tips oriented vertically. Surfaces have sparse hairs, especially below. Midveins strongly depressed above and protruding below. Secondary veins numerous, 55° to the midvein, flat to faintly depressed above and protruding below. Margins usually have tiny teeth, but these are hard to notice. Petioles 70-100% of terminal leaflet length. Inflorescence dense terminal racemes to 10" (25 cm) long, the rachis sparsely hairy with 6-30 blooming flowers crowded in a short section, with numerous unopened buds at the tip. Pedicels thread-thin, about 0.8" (2 cm) long, each with a narrowly lanceolate bract at the base. Bracts persist after unfertilized flowers fall off, leaving the lower rachis crowded with tiny bracts. Flowers (summer) have 4 sepals fused to their midpoint, ending in small triangular lobes, and 4 pink to light purple petals about 1 cm long. Petals are similar in size but asymmetrically arranged. There are 6 radiating stamens protruding about twice the length of the petals. Pod thin, often slightly curved, 1-2.5" (2.5-6 cm) long, green, cylindrical, slightly constricted between the seeds, drooping. Seeds numerous, about 3 mm, slightly flattened, roundish with a slight coil. HABITAT: Sunny, disturbed soils; steep slopes, washes, ravines, roadsides, construction sites, etc., especially where sandy. Native. FOOD USE: The tender young stems, leaves, and flowers are used as a seasoning or vegetable. Raw, they are spicy-hot; cooking makes them milder. Leaflets remain tender long after the stems toughen. The ripe pods can be collected and dried, then broken up to release the seeds, which can be sifted or winnowed to remove the trash. The seeds can be ground and eaten or cooked as a porridge. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: Like many culinary herbs, beeplant is often considered to have a disagreeable odor by those who don't use it. The smell is strong and unique, and the flavor is among the hottest of our wild edibles. Beeplant is strikingly beautiful and rightfully popular as an ornamental. There are numerous other common names. 642 