BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
6 mermaid
Floerkia Hot proserpinacoides 3 + family Limnanthaceae
CHECK: Tiny, flimsy, hairless plant forming carpets difficulty in spring; 2. 3-5 part compound
QUICK tiny, single 3-petal flowers on long pedicels. ID
leaves; spring ephemeral 6-11" (15-28 cm) tall, often found in dense at the masses base,
light green, (rarely a few of them) borne at the base.
or carpets, the weakly plants erect, solid, hairless, 1-2 mm thick. Leaves alternate, Lower leaves
DESCRIPTION: Annual usually tangled. All parts hairless. Stems often branched 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm)
long, pinnately compound, leaves one have 5 or 7 leaflets, the terminal sometimes lobed or conjoined. sparkly Leaflets in the sun sessile, and
5-11 entire. Midvein lightly incised. Faint secondary veins, almost parallel, those of the
have mm, 3 leaflets: narrowly upper elliptic to oblanceolate, tapered to a point on both ends, the surface arise near mid-leaflet;
flat, the veins margins not evident. Petioles 3-4 times the blade length, thin with a narrow groove, mm) upper from
leaves other with are a small sheath at the base. Flowers few, 3 mm across, single on long pedicels to 1.3" (33
leaf axils, ascending but with the tip drooping. There are 3 triangular green sepals with prominent veins
and upper 3 smaller, narrow, whitish petals set between them; the sepais get longer with fruiting. Fruit 1-3 bumpy
greenish balls, ripening to brown and containing a single, proportionately large seed.
HABITAT: Moist to mucky, rich, frequently but lightly disturbed soil in shade: depressions in small floodplains
(or the higher parts of large floodplains where floods aren't too intense), low spots in woods, pond and swamp
margins, mucky seeps, shrub swamps. Native.
FOOD USE: The greens (all parts) are delicious raw and can also be eaten cooked. They have a fleeting heat
with a fruity undertone and the green mildness of chickweed. This is the best leafy green you will ever put on
a taco, or perhaps in your mouth in any form. Snip with scissors where the plants are crowded, leaving many
to go to seed, and curate your patch. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This is said to be the only North American dicot herb with 3-petaled flowers. It also has the
highest seed recruitment rate (25% of seeds became adults in one study) of any plant ever studied. I don't
know what baffles me more: that such a magical dainty even exists, that almost nobody talks of it, or that it
took me four decades to discover it. Just this one tiny green is worth this book's price. AKA false mermaid.
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED 6 mermaid Floerkia Hot proserpinacoides 3 + family Limnanthaceae CHECK: Tiny, flimsy, hairless plant forming carpets difficulty in spring; 2. 3-5 part compound QUICK tiny, single 3-petal flowers on long pedicels. ID leaves; spring ephemeral 6-11" (15-28 cm) tall, often found in dense at the masses base, light green, (rarely a few of them) borne at the base. or carpets, the weakly plants erect, solid, hairless, 1-2 mm thick. Leaves alternate, Lower leaves DESCRIPTION: Annual usually tangled. All parts hairless. Stems often branched 0.4-0.8" (1-2 cm) long, pinnately compound, leaves one have 5 or 7 leaflets, the terminal sometimes lobed or conjoined. sparkly Leaflets in the sun sessile, and 5-11 entire. Midvein lightly incised. Faint secondary veins, almost parallel, those of the have mm, 3 leaflets: narrowly upper elliptic to oblanceolate, tapered to a point on both ends, the surface arise near mid-leaflet; flat, the veins margins not evident. Petioles 3-4 times the blade length, thin with a narrow groove, mm) upper from leaves other with are a small sheath at the base. Flowers few, 3 mm across, single on long pedicels to 1.3" (33 leaf axils, ascending but with the tip drooping. There are 3 triangular green sepals with prominent veins and upper 3 smaller, narrow, whitish petals set between them; the sepais get longer with fruiting. Fruit 1-3 bumpy greenish balls, ripening to brown and containing a single, proportionately large seed. HABITAT: Moist to mucky, rich, frequently but lightly disturbed soil in shade: depressions in small floodplains (or the higher parts of large floodplains where floods aren't too intense), low spots in woods, pond and swamp margins, mucky seeps, shrub swamps. Native. FOOD USE: The greens (all parts) are delicious raw and can also be eaten cooked. They have a fleeting heat with a fruity undertone and the green mildness of chickweed. This is the best leafy green you will ever put on a taco, or perhaps in your mouth in any form. Snip with scissors where the plants are crowded, leaving many to go to seed, and curate your patch. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This is said to be the only North American dicot herb with 3-petaled flowers. It also has the highest seed recruitment rate (25% of seeds became adults in one study) of any plant ever studied. I don't know what baffles me more: that such a magical dainty even exists, that almost nobody talks of it, or that it took me four decades to discover it. Just this one tiny green is worth this book's price. AKA false mermaid. 