BASAL
LEAVES
ABSENT,
LEAVES
8 Sweet clovers (white and yellow)
Melilotus albus and M. officinalis Fabaceae (Bean family)
QUICK CHECK: Tall and branchy, compound leaves with 3 leaflets, small yellow or white
flowers in elongated, curving racemes. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Biennial or annual aromatic herbs 3-7' (90-210 cm) tall, with many
ascending branches (including at the base), the form taller than wide and typically leaning. fine
Stems 5-14 mm thick, zigzag, ridged, with a small hollow, hairless or with extremely
hairs, the surface green (reddish at the base). Leaves alternate, ternately compound, the
terminal one with a short stalk and the other 2 sessile. Petioles deeply channeled above,
Composite
broadly keeled below, 70-90% of terminal leaflet length. Stipules small, fused and sheath-
range.
like at the base, then wispy and pointed. Leaflets 0.5-1.2" (13-30 mm) long, obovate to
oblanceolate (wider toward the tip), the bases angled, the tips pointed to blunt or flat, the blades hairles
Midvein depressed above; secondary veins are numerous and flat to faintly raised above. Margins with ve
fine, widely spaced teeth. Inflorescence numerous thin, erect
but curved racemes 2-8" (5-20 cm) long on peduncles
60-100% of the cluster's length. Flowers narrow and pea-
like, drooping, 5-7 mm long, white or yellow, the banner
longer than the other parts, folded only slightly back, keeled.
Pods egg-shaped with 1-2 light brown seeds.
SPECIES: Yellow sweet clover blooms earlier and tends
to be shorter, but otherwise these two species are nearly
identical except for the flower color.
HABITAT: Dry, disturbed soil in full sun. Roadsides (usu-
ally right next to the gravel shoulder), railroad tracks, steep
meadows, vacant lots, rubble heaps, dry fields. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Flowers and leaves can be used for tea, fresh or
dried. The youngest leaves and growing tips can supposedly
be used raw in salads or eaten as a cooked vegetable-they
are very tender but also exceptionally bitter. I only consider
them suitable as a sea-
soning. When dried, the
leaves have a fragrance
reminiscent of vanilla
and have been widely
used as a flavoring, as
have the seeds.
COMMENTS: Yel-
low and white sweet
clover can be used
interchangeably as a
flavoring. Literature of-
ten contains warnings
that moldy sweet clover
can produce coumarin,
a potentially danger-
ous anti-coagulant.
This means that if your
sweet clover hay is
moldy, don't eat it. I bet
you weren't going to do
that anyway.
646
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES 8 Sweet clovers (white and yellow) Melilotus albus and M. officinalis Fabaceae (Bean family) QUICK CHECK: Tall and branchy, compound leaves with 3 leaflets, small yellow or white flowers in elongated, curving racemes. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Biennial or annual aromatic herbs 3-7' (90-210 cm) tall, with many ascending branches (including at the base), the form taller than wide and typically leaning. fine Stems 5-14 mm thick, zigzag, ridged, with a small hollow, hairless or with extremely hairs, the surface green (reddish at the base). Leaves alternate, ternately compound, the terminal one with a short stalk and the other 2 sessile. Petioles deeply channeled above, Composite broadly keeled below, 70-90% of terminal leaflet length. Stipules small, fused and sheath- range. like at the base, then wispy and pointed. Leaflets 0.5-1.2" (13-30 mm) long, obovate to oblanceolate (wider toward the tip), the bases angled, the tips pointed to blunt or flat, the blades hairles Midvein depressed above; secondary veins are numerous and flat to faintly raised above. Margins with ve fine, widely spaced teeth. Inflorescence numerous thin, erect but curved racemes 2-8" (5-20 cm) long on peduncles 60-100% of the cluster's length. Flowers narrow and pea- like, drooping, 5-7 mm long, white or yellow, the banner longer than the other parts, folded only slightly back, keeled. Pods egg-shaped with 1-2 light brown seeds. SPECIES: Yellow sweet clover blooms earlier and tends to be shorter, but otherwise these two species are nearly identical except for the flower color. HABITAT: Dry, disturbed soil in full sun. Roadsides (usu- ally right next to the gravel shoulder), railroad tracks, steep meadows, vacant lots, rubble heaps, dry fields. Introduced. FOOD USE: Flowers and leaves can be used for tea, fresh or dried. The youngest leaves and growing tips can supposedly be used raw in salads or eaten as a cooked vegetable-they are very tender but also exceptionally bitter. I only consider them suitable as a sea- soning. When dried, the leaves have a fragrance reminiscent of vanilla and have been widely used as a flavoring, as have the seeds. COMMENTS: Yel- low and white sweet clover can be used interchangeably as a flavoring. Literature of- ten contains warnings that moldy sweet clover can produce coumarin, a potentially danger- ous anti-coagulant. This means that if your sweet clover hay is moldy, don't eat it. I bet you weren't going to do that anyway. 646 