1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
7 Point-leaf tick trefoil
3
Desmodium glutinosum
Fabaceae (Bean family)
QUICK CHECK: Erect, knee-high woodland plant with a whorl cluster of for rately
compound leaves atop a naked stalk; D-shaped seeds connected in chains. ID difficulty 1.
DESCRIPTION: Herbaceous perennial. Stems single or few per crown, vertical, straight,
stiff, solid, round, green, smooth with fine sparse hairs and stringy bark. The stem is
unbranched, naked for the lower 8-17" (20-43 cm), then has a whorl-like cluster of 5-9 alternate
leaves densely packed into less than 2" (5 cm) of stem-the uppermost appearing paired.
Leaves ternately compound with 3 leaflets, spreading to form a horizontal leafy layer. Side leaflets are on very
short petiolules (3-6 mm); the terminal is much longer. Rachis naked for 40-70% of its length, green or maroon
with an enlarged base, stiff, thin, sparsely soft-hairy with a shallow groove near the top of each side and a
shallow channel on top; there is a small ridge running inside this channel. Leaflets thin, sparsely hairy, 2.5-A
(6-10 cm) long with entire but hairy margins and a long acuminate tip. Side leaflets are broadly ovate, lopsided
with a broad base; terminal leaflets are much broader, often almost rounded. Midvein and secondary veins
are lightly, often broadly, depressed; they protrude below. Inflorescence (midsummer) an elongated, erect
panicle or raceme, to 28" (70 cm) long with a dominant, straight central rachis and a few minor side branches.
the flowers in pairs or small clusters (occasionally single) spaced along the raceme, the pedicels 3-5 mm
Flowers tiny, the corolla 4-6 mm long, pea-like, the wings and banner cupped, pink outside and pale inside;
calyx 2-3mm. Fruit (late summer to fall)
a short chain of 2-3 D-shaped, flattened
segments (loments) which stick to cloth-
ing, connected at constricted points, the
skin tightly enclosing one seed
HABITAT: Hardwood forests with rich
but dry soil and moderate sunlight pen
etration, especially those dominated by
oaks. Native A
FOOD USE: Ripe seeds make an excel-
lent cooked bean, but they are naid to
collect in quantity. When clean them
off my clothing, I usually nibble them.
I gather them by whipping the tops with
an old t-shirt in late summer or early
autumn. Conservation 1.
COMMENTS: The annoying haif-moon
seeds stick to your clothes when you
hike in late summer. They have been fre-
quently found in archaeological remains
in our region but seem to have fallen out
of favor with the arrival of more labor-
efficient domesticated beans. It is hard
to avoid nibbling a food that collects
itself, but like other beans, these should
be cooked if eaten in quantity.
RELATED EDIBLES: Other members
of the genus presumably have usable
seeds; I have tried several, all of which
tasted nearly identical. Archaeologists
have not specified the species recov
and but this one has the largest seeds
and a eat them. AKA Hylodes-
glutinosum.
1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED 7 Point-leaf tick trefoil 3 Desmodium glutinosum Fabaceae (Bean family) QUICK CHECK: Erect, knee-high woodland plant with a whorl cluster of for rately compound leaves atop a naked stalk; D-shaped seeds connected in chains. ID difficulty 1. DESCRIPTION: Herbaceous perennial. Stems single or few per crown, vertical, straight, stiff, solid, round, green, smooth with fine sparse hairs and stringy bark. The stem is unbranched, naked for the lower 8-17" (20-43 cm), then has a whorl-like cluster of 5-9 alternate leaves densely packed into less than 2" (5 cm) of stem-the uppermost appearing paired. Leaves ternately compound with 3 leaflets, spreading to form a horizontal leafy layer. Side leaflets are on very short petiolules (3-6 mm); the terminal is much longer. Rachis naked for 40-70% of its length, green or maroon with an enlarged base, stiff, thin, sparsely soft-hairy with a shallow groove near the top of each side and a shallow channel on top; there is a small ridge running inside this channel. Leaflets thin, sparsely hairy, 2.5-A (6-10 cm) long with entire but hairy margins and a long acuminate tip. Side leaflets are broadly ovate, lopsided with a broad base; terminal leaflets are much broader, often almost rounded. Midvein and secondary veins are lightly, often broadly, depressed; they protrude below. Inflorescence (midsummer) an elongated, erect panicle or raceme, to 28" (70 cm) long with a dominant, straight central rachis and a few minor side branches. the flowers in pairs or small clusters (occasionally single) spaced along the raceme, the pedicels 3-5 mm Flowers tiny, the corolla 4-6 mm long, pea-like, the wings and banner cupped, pink outside and pale inside; calyx 2-3mm. Fruit (late summer to fall) a short chain of 2-3 D-shaped, flattened segments (loments) which stick to cloth- ing, connected at constricted points, the skin tightly enclosing one seed HABITAT: Hardwood forests with rich but dry soil and moderate sunlight pen etration, especially those dominated by oaks. Native A FOOD USE: Ripe seeds make an excel- lent cooked bean, but they are naid to collect in quantity. When clean them off my clothing, I usually nibble them. I gather them by whipping the tops with an old t-shirt in late summer or early autumn. Conservation 1. COMMENTS: The annoying haif-moon seeds stick to your clothes when you hike in late summer. They have been fre- quently found in archaeological remains in our region but seem to have fallen out of favor with the arrival of more labor- efficient domesticated beans. It is hard to avoid nibbling a food that collects itself, but like other beans, these should be cooked if eaten in quantity. RELATED EDIBLES: Other members of the genus presumably have usable seeds; I have tried several, all of which tasted nearly identical. Archaeologists have not specified the species recov and but this one has the largest seeds and a eat them. AKA Hylodes- glutinosum. 