Dr.
1cm
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
9 Prairie clovers (white and purple)
Dalea candida, D. purpurea Fabaceae (Bean 1.2 family)
QUICK CHECK: Slender and hairless with clumped stems and small pinnately compound
leaves, the leaflets thin and entire; cylindrical head of tightly packed tiny flowers.
ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennials. Root 0.5-0.9" (13-23 mm) thick at the top, woody and branching
but soon becoming thin, fleshy, and long-tapered, the skin smooth to slightly corrugated,
yellow-brown to greenish. Stems multiple, clumped, 1-4 (30-120 cm) tall and 3-5 mm thick,
erect to leaning or spreading, straight, thin, tough, roundish with small ridges, hairless but
White prairie
with a few scattered glands, simple or branching. LYDS often persistent. Leaves alternate, up
clover.
to 3" (8 cm) long, pinnately compound with 3-9 leaflets, nearly sessile or on short petioles;
the terminal leaflet is distinctly longer. The leaves are sometimes borne in clumps, with 1 or 2
smaller leaves beside a larger leaf in the center. Leaflets 0.3-0.8" (8-20 mm) long, linear,
oblanceolate, or long-elliptic, entire, the tips often blunt with a needle-like point, sessile or
with very short petiolules. Blades are deeply folded along the midvein, often appearing
channeled, with small glands below making them sticky. Inflorescence erect terminal spikes
1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long borne singly and widely separated on long, naked, grooved peduncles,
Purple prairie
tightly packed with several dozen to hundreds of
clover.
flowers blooming in a broad ring that progresses
from the bottom to the top. Flowers 3-4 long with 5 elliptic petals,
stalked at the base, of nearly the same size and form. Anthers on
long filaments protrude well beyond the petals. Seed tiny, kidney-
shaped, one per each tiny pod enclosed in the calyx.
SPECIES: White prairie clover D. candida has white flowers and the
spike has numerous tiny, ascending, stiff bracts. The stems tend to
lean and spread widely and have many small branches; the leaflets
are broader and hairless. Purple prairie clover D. purpurea has purple
flowers with a downcurved bract beneath the bud. The leaflets
are much narrower and often have fine hairs on the margins. The
branches tend to be fewer but larger. Other species in this genus
may bei similarly edible, but some are bitter and distasteful. These
two are the only species I know to be foodworthy.
HABITAT: Dry, sunny open areas, especially rocky slopes; mead-
OWS, roadsides, prairies, open oak woods, savannahs. Preferred
by cattle and thus heavily
impacted by grazing. Native.
d
FOOD USE: Roots can be
eaten as a vegetable when
the top is dormant. The fla-
vor is good, but they are quite
tough. The tender young
leaves can also be chopped
fine and used as an herb. The
aromatic leaves make a deli-
cious tea, fresh or dried, at
any age. Conservation 3/2.
COMMENTS: These marvel-
ous and distinctive prairie
plants should be propagated
by anyone owning suitable
habitat.
Roots of both species- white on top
647
purple Jeff middle) below (left bottom) Purple prairie clover shipts
Dr. 1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED 9 Prairie clovers (white and purple) Dalea candida, D. purpurea Fabaceae (Bean 1.2 family) QUICK CHECK: Slender and hairless with clumped stems and small pinnately compound leaves, the leaflets thin and entire; cylindrical head of tightly packed tiny flowers. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennials. Root 0.5-0.9" (13-23 mm) thick at the top, woody and branching but soon becoming thin, fleshy, and long-tapered, the skin smooth to slightly corrugated, yellow-brown to greenish. Stems multiple, clumped, 1-4 (30-120 cm) tall and 3-5 mm thick, erect to leaning or spreading, straight, thin, tough, roundish with small ridges, hairless but White prairie with a few scattered glands, simple or branching. LYDS often persistent. Leaves alternate, up clover. to 3" (8 cm) long, pinnately compound with 3-9 leaflets, nearly sessile or on short petioles; the terminal leaflet is distinctly longer. The leaves are sometimes borne in clumps, with 1 or 2 smaller leaves beside a larger leaf in the center. Leaflets 0.3-0.8" (8-20 mm) long, linear, oblanceolate, or long-elliptic, entire, the tips often blunt with a needle-like point, sessile or with very short petiolules. Blades are deeply folded along the midvein, often appearing channeled, with small glands below making them sticky. Inflorescence erect terminal spikes 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long borne singly and widely separated on long, naked, grooved peduncles, Purple prairie tightly packed with several dozen to hundreds of clover. flowers blooming in a broad ring that progresses from the bottom to the top. Flowers 3-4 long with 5 elliptic petals, stalked at the base, of nearly the same size and form. Anthers on long filaments protrude well beyond the petals. Seed tiny, kidney- shaped, one per each tiny pod enclosed in the calyx. SPECIES: White prairie clover D. candida has white flowers and the spike has numerous tiny, ascending, stiff bracts. The stems tend to lean and spread widely and have many small branches; the leaflets are broader and hairless. Purple prairie clover D. purpurea has purple flowers with a downcurved bract beneath the bud. The leaflets are much narrower and often have fine hairs on the margins. The branches tend to be fewer but larger. Other species in this genus may bei similarly edible, but some are bitter and distasteful. These two are the only species I know to be foodworthy. HABITAT: Dry, sunny open areas, especially rocky slopes; mead- OWS, roadsides, prairies, open oak woods, savannahs. Preferred by cattle and thus heavily impacted by grazing. Native. d FOOD USE: Roots can be eaten as a vegetable when the top is dormant. The fla- vor is good, but they are quite tough. The tender young leaves can also be chopped fine and used as an herb. The aromatic leaves make a deli- cious tea, fresh or dried, at any age. Conservation 3/2. COMMENTS: These marvel- ous and distinctive prairie plants should be propagated by anyone owning suitable habitat. Roots of both species- white on top 647 purple Jeff middle) below (left bottom) Purple prairie clover shipts 