BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND
10 American licorice
2
1
Glycirrhiza waist-high colonial herb with pinnately compound difficulty leaves 3. and
lepidota
Fabaceae
(Bean
family)
QUICK leaflets; CHECK: irregular Erect, white flowers and burs in dense clusters. ID
entire perennial forming loose colonies by a network whitish of rhizomes. inside,
DESCRIPTION: Aromatic tapering, tough, almost woody, brown outside and erect, single
Rhizomes long, thin, rarely hardly thicker than 0.7" (18 mm). Stems 2-3.5' (o.6-1 tall, faintly ridged
running very deep, usually simple but sometimes branching. The surface is and few to no
Rare east of
or in small clumps, reddish with scattered, sticky, mostly stalkless, light-dotted glands compound,
the Mississippi
and often Shoots dark have ridges, scales, and sticky glands. Leaves alternate, pinnately terminal leaflet
River.
7-12" (18-30 cm) long tiny and 11-19 triangular. Rachis naked in the proximal 10% with a channel near blunt the base, tips and narrowing entire
hairs. with leaflets, each on a short, stout, petiolule; the
is largest. Stipules distally. Leaflets 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long, paired, lanceolate with pointed or folded along its
to a deep typically groove angled upward to form a shallow V along the rachis; each leaflet is likewise protruding
midvein. margins, Surfaces are sticky and glandular, especially the lower. Midvein strongly depressed above,
and often hairy beneath; secondary veins are several per side and slightly depressed. Inflorescence a tightly
packed, spike-like raceme 1.2-2" (3-5 cm) long, from the axils of upper leaves on a peduncle about as long as
the raceme. Flowers pea-like, about 0.5" (13 mm) long, the corolla whitish, the banner elongated and curled
upward. Fruit a pod about 0.7" (18 mm) long, slightly curved, dark brown at maturity, covered with numerous
hooked bristles that make it a stick-tight bur; inside are 3-5 bean-like seeds about 2 mm long.
HABITAT: Sunny, moist, well-drained sites in full sun: ravines, slopes, and near watercourses in prairies and
savannahs. Also roadsides, meadows, and forest edges. Native.
FOOD USE: It is often reported that the rhizomes can be "eaten" raw or cooked. They are really too tough to
eat and devoid of any substantial starchy portion, but they can be chewed or brewed into tea for their flavor-
which is very strong, and quite unlike what most people expect. The shoots can be collected in late spring,
at the height of 10-20" (25-50 cm), and eaten raw or cooked after peeling the bitter skin. They remind me of
sumac shoots. Flowers can also be nibbled. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This is a close relative of licorice (Glycirrhiza glabra), which is found in Europe. The root was
more widely chewed in the past.
Since it has significant medicinal
qualities, this should be done in
moderation. Certain historical
and ethnographic reports of this
plant's use are in error due to its
frequent confusion with related
members of Hedysarum, Astrag-
alus, or Lupi-
nus, or with
the unrelated
licorice-tast-
ing members
of Ozmorhiza.
This proba-
bly explains
the reports of
the rhizomes
being cooked
and eaten
"like sweet
polatoes."
Shoot.
648
The same shoot
after peeling
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND 10 American licorice 2 1 Glycirrhiza waist-high colonial herb with pinnately compound difficulty leaves 3. and lepidota Fabaceae (Bean family) QUICK leaflets; CHECK: irregular Erect, white flowers and burs in dense clusters. ID entire perennial forming loose colonies by a network whitish of rhizomes. inside, DESCRIPTION: Aromatic tapering, tough, almost woody, brown outside and erect, single Rhizomes long, thin, rarely hardly thicker than 0.7" (18 mm). Stems 2-3.5' (o.6-1 tall, faintly ridged running very deep, usually simple but sometimes branching. The surface is and few to no Rare east of or in small clumps, reddish with scattered, sticky, mostly stalkless, light-dotted glands compound, the Mississippi and often Shoots dark have ridges, scales, and sticky glands. Leaves alternate, pinnately terminal leaflet River. 7-12" (18-30 cm) long tiny and 11-19 triangular. Rachis naked in the proximal 10% with a channel near blunt the base, tips and narrowing entire hairs. with leaflets, each on a short, stout, petiolule; the is largest. Stipules distally. Leaflets 1-2" (2.5-5 cm) long, paired, lanceolate with pointed or folded along its to a deep typically groove angled upward to form a shallow V along the rachis; each leaflet is likewise protruding midvein. margins, Surfaces are sticky and glandular, especially the lower. Midvein strongly depressed above, and often hairy beneath; secondary veins are several per side and slightly depressed. Inflorescence a tightly packed, spike-like raceme 1.2-2" (3-5 cm) long, from the axils of upper leaves on a peduncle about as long as the raceme. Flowers pea-like, about 0.5" (13 mm) long, the corolla whitish, the banner elongated and curled upward. Fruit a pod about 0.7" (18 mm) long, slightly curved, dark brown at maturity, covered with numerous hooked bristles that make it a stick-tight bur; inside are 3-5 bean-like seeds about 2 mm long. HABITAT: Sunny, moist, well-drained sites in full sun: ravines, slopes, and near watercourses in prairies and savannahs. Also roadsides, meadows, and forest edges. Native. FOOD USE: It is often reported that the rhizomes can be "eaten" raw or cooked. They are really too tough to eat and devoid of any substantial starchy portion, but they can be chewed or brewed into tea for their flavor- which is very strong, and quite unlike what most people expect. The shoots can be collected in late spring, at the height of 10-20" (25-50 cm), and eaten raw or cooked after peeling the bitter skin. They remind me of sumac shoots. Flowers can also be nibbled. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This is a close relative of licorice (Glycirrhiza glabra), which is found in Europe. The root was more widely chewed in the past. Since it has significant medicinal qualities, this should be done in moderation. Certain historical and ethnographic reports of this plant's use are in error due to its frequent confusion with related members of Hedysarum, Astrag- alus, or Lupi- nus, or with the unrelated licorice-tast- ing members of Ozmorhiza. This proba- bly explains the reports of the rhizomes being cooked and eaten "like sweet polatoes." Shoot. 648 The same shoot after peeling 