1cm
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
11 Ground-plum milkvetch
3
Astragalus crassicarpus
Fabaceae (Bean family)
and QUICK CHECK: Small, many-stemmed decumbent plant with finely compound lea 105
plump, green, grape-sized fruit. ID difficulty 2.
DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a thick, tough root. Stems several to many in a tuft, to
18" (46 cm) long, weakly erect to leaning in bloom but lying on the ground when in fruit, up not
branched, round, the surface with fine, soft hairs pressed toward the tip. Leaves alternate,
once pinnately compound, to 4.5" (11 cm) long, the leaflets beginning close to the bottom
of the rachis, widely spaced, often folded strongly upward. Rachis usually curved, grooved on top, covered
with hairs appressed toward the tip. Stipules small and tapered to a sharp tip. Leaflets usually 9-21, on very
short petiolules, the blades 0.4-0.9" (10-23 mm) long, thin, entire, lanceolate to long-elliptic, often strongly
cupped or folded, sharp or blunt at the tip with a downturned claw. Surfaces with fine appressed hairs, the
midvein and secondary veins faint and flat on both sides. Inflorescence dense racemes 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long on
peduncles 2-4" (5-10 cm) long from lower leaf axils, each raceme with 5-14 flowers. Flowers (spring) 5-8 mm
long, the calyx tubular, reddish, with sharp triangular lobes of equal size, the lobes much shorter than the tube.
Corolla light pinkish purple, irregular (pea-like), the banner longer than wide and folded upward, much larger
than the narrow wings and keel. Fruit a thick, juicy, plum-shaped pod 0.6-0.9" (15-23 mm) long, green with a
reddish tint on the upper side as it ripens, containing many small, round seeds that blacken as the pods dry.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Many other legumes,
including several members of the genus Astrag-
alus, are similar in appearance, but lack plump
pods this large.
HABITAT: Dry prairies, grassy or rocky slopes,
open sunny woods. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather pods when very young
and eat raw as a snack. When slightly older
just chew on them, suck the juice. and spit out
the skin. Mature fruits get very tough. Con-
servation 1.
COMMENTS: This unique edible tastes like
sweet peas and makes a pleasant snack. A very
similar species, A. bibullatus. is confined to the
cedar glades of central Tennessee and is dis-
appearing primarily from fire suppression; its
edibility is unknown to me, and it should never
be collected due to its rarity.
049
1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED 11 Ground-plum milkvetch 3 Astragalus crassicarpus Fabaceae (Bean family) and QUICK CHECK: Small, many-stemmed decumbent plant with finely compound lea 105 plump, green, grape-sized fruit. ID difficulty 2. DESCRIPTION: Perennial from a thick, tough root. Stems several to many in a tuft, to 18" (46 cm) long, weakly erect to leaning in bloom but lying on the ground when in fruit, up not branched, round, the surface with fine, soft hairs pressed toward the tip. Leaves alternate, once pinnately compound, to 4.5" (11 cm) long, the leaflets beginning close to the bottom of the rachis, widely spaced, often folded strongly upward. Rachis usually curved, grooved on top, covered with hairs appressed toward the tip. Stipules small and tapered to a sharp tip. Leaflets usually 9-21, on very short petiolules, the blades 0.4-0.9" (10-23 mm) long, thin, entire, lanceolate to long-elliptic, often strongly cupped or folded, sharp or blunt at the tip with a downturned claw. Surfaces with fine appressed hairs, the midvein and secondary veins faint and flat on both sides. Inflorescence dense racemes 1-3" (2.5-8 cm) long on peduncles 2-4" (5-10 cm) long from lower leaf axils, each raceme with 5-14 flowers. Flowers (spring) 5-8 mm long, the calyx tubular, reddish, with sharp triangular lobes of equal size, the lobes much shorter than the tube. Corolla light pinkish purple, irregular (pea-like), the banner longer than wide and folded upward, much larger than the narrow wings and keel. Fruit a thick, juicy, plum-shaped pod 0.6-0.9" (15-23 mm) long, green with a reddish tint on the upper side as it ripens, containing many small, round seeds that blacken as the pods dry. CONFUSING PLANTS: Many other legumes, including several members of the genus Astrag- alus, are similar in appearance, but lack plump pods this large. HABITAT: Dry prairies, grassy or rocky slopes, open sunny woods. Native. FOOD USE: Gather pods when very young and eat raw as a snack. When slightly older just chew on them, suck the juice. and spit out the skin. Mature fruits get very tough. Con- servation 1. COMMENTS: This unique edible tastes like sweet peas and makes a pleasant snack. A very similar species, A. bibullatus. is confined to the cedar glades of central Tennessee and is dis- appearing primarily from fire suppression; its edibility is unknown to me, and it should never be collected due to its rarity. 049 