BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
12 Alpine sweetvetch
2
Hedysarum Multi-stemmed; pinnately compound leaves with numerous between small, the
alpinum
Fabaceae
(Bean
family)
blunt QUICK leaflets, CHECK: long one-sided racemes of pink flowers, pods constricted
seeds. ID difficulty 3.
Perennial. Taproot enlarged, often multi-crowned, to 1.2" flesh (3 cm) white thick, and
DESCRIPTION: often crooked, the thin skin brown to black, readily peeling, or spreading
fibrous. minutely pubescent, pithy in the center (hollow branched when at young), angles finely
long-tapered, Shoot buds in spring are pink and blunt. Stems clumped, leaning at the base
to weakly erect, hairless striped, to 20-32" (50-80 tall and up to 1 cm thick, tough, narrow compound,
ridged and often the lightly half. LYDS persistent, reddish-brown, the bark fibrous. Leaves pinnately angled upward.
and mostly (6-18 in cm) long, upper with 9-21 leaflets, paired or offset, starting very near the base and often (much longer
2.5-7" Rachis shallowly channeled, with minute appressed hairs. Stipules dry and brown, 4-22 mm long
on lower leaves), fused on early growth, later splitting and separating from the tip down, with a broad, sheathing
base and a needle-like tip. Leaflets 0.6-1.3" (15-33 mm) long, nearly sessile, elliptic to lanceolate, entire, the
tips blunt or pointed (not notched), with a small, sharp, downturned tooth, the blade slightly folded along the
midvein. The terminal leaflet is often downturned. Surface hairless or nearly so above but with soft, light,
appressed hairs below. Secondary veins several per side, 45-55°, nearly flat above. Inflorescence racemes
3-11" (13-28 cm) long on a long peduncle from an upper leaf axil, the numerous flowers on pedicels 3-4 mm,
oriented mostly to one side. Flowers drooping, 0.5-0.7" (13-18 mm) long, irregular (pea-like), pinkish to purple.
The keel is much longer than the banner and wings, deeply folded and enclosing the sexual parts. The banner
is 2-lobed at the top and curved upward, the wings strongly hooked. The calyx has 5 triangular, folded lobes.
Pods (loments) flat, segmented, constricted and occasionally stalked between its 3-5 seeds.
CONFUSING PLANTS: H. mackenzii has smaller, tougher roots not worthy of eating; its flowers are larger
and its leaves have obscure secondary veins.
HABITAT: Boreal forest openings, especially steep slopes and stream banks on limestone. Native.
FOOD USE: Gather roots, preferably when the plant is dormant. They are stringy but have a sweet pea-pod
flavor; slice crosswise and cook well to counter the toughness. Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: There are few root vegetables in the Far North, so this one has been highly appreciated by subarctic
foragers despite its modest sustenance value. Christopher
McCandless collected and ate this plant during the summer
(top) Hedysarum alpinum roots.
of 1992 when he starved to death in Alaska. The author John
Krakauer concocted several implausible scenarios in which
this or a related plant supposedly poisoned McCandless,
but provides no good evidence that such a thing took place.
Chris clearly starved to death, and there is no reason to
blame it on this or any other plant. AKA wild sweet pea.
650
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED 12 Alpine sweetvetch 2 Hedysarum Multi-stemmed; pinnately compound leaves with numerous between small, the alpinum Fabaceae (Bean family) blunt QUICK leaflets, CHECK: long one-sided racemes of pink flowers, pods constricted seeds. ID difficulty 3. Perennial. Taproot enlarged, often multi-crowned, to 1.2" flesh (3 cm) white thick, and DESCRIPTION: often crooked, the thin skin brown to black, readily peeling, or spreading fibrous. minutely pubescent, pithy in the center (hollow branched when at young), angles finely long-tapered, Shoot buds in spring are pink and blunt. Stems clumped, leaning at the base to weakly erect, hairless striped, to 20-32" (50-80 tall and up to 1 cm thick, tough, narrow compound, ridged and often the lightly half. LYDS persistent, reddish-brown, the bark fibrous. Leaves pinnately angled upward. and mostly (6-18 in cm) long, upper with 9-21 leaflets, paired or offset, starting very near the base and often (much longer 2.5-7" Rachis shallowly channeled, with minute appressed hairs. Stipules dry and brown, 4-22 mm long on lower leaves), fused on early growth, later splitting and separating from the tip down, with a broad, sheathing base and a needle-like tip. Leaflets 0.6-1.3" (15-33 mm) long, nearly sessile, elliptic to lanceolate, entire, the tips blunt or pointed (not notched), with a small, sharp, downturned tooth, the blade slightly folded along the midvein. The terminal leaflet is often downturned. Surface hairless or nearly so above but with soft, light, appressed hairs below. Secondary veins several per side, 45-55°, nearly flat above. Inflorescence racemes 3-11" (13-28 cm) long on a long peduncle from an upper leaf axil, the numerous flowers on pedicels 3-4 mm, oriented mostly to one side. Flowers drooping, 0.5-0.7" (13-18 mm) long, irregular (pea-like), pinkish to purple. The keel is much longer than the banner and wings, deeply folded and enclosing the sexual parts. The banner is 2-lobed at the top and curved upward, the wings strongly hooked. The calyx has 5 triangular, folded lobes. Pods (loments) flat, segmented, constricted and occasionally stalked between its 3-5 seeds. CONFUSING PLANTS: H. mackenzii has smaller, tougher roots not worthy of eating; its flowers are larger and its leaves have obscure secondary veins. HABITAT: Boreal forest openings, especially steep slopes and stream banks on limestone. Native. FOOD USE: Gather roots, preferably when the plant is dormant. They are stringy but have a sweet pea-pod flavor; slice crosswise and cook well to counter the toughness. Conservation 3. COMMENTS: There are few root vegetables in the Far North, so this one has been highly appreciated by subarctic foragers despite its modest sustenance value. Christopher McCandless collected and ate this plant during the summer (top) Hedysarum alpinum roots. of 1992 when he starved to death in Alaska. The author John Krakauer concocted several implausible scenarios in which this or a related plant supposedly poisoned McCandless, but provides no good evidence that such a thing took place. Chris clearly starved to death, and there is no reason to blame it on this or any other plant. AKA wild sweet pea. 650 