promium
1cm
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
13 Hemp
3
Cannabis sativa Cannabinaceae (Hemp family)
pointed, QUICK CHECK: Tall, aromatic herb with palmately compound leaves with narrow,
toothed leaflets with strongly depressed secondary veins. ID difficulty 9 1,
DESCRIPTION: Weedy annual, aromatic, branching heavily in the but little if
crowded. Stem straight, erect, prominent, reaching 5-16' (1.5-5 m) in open, height, to
(2.5 cm) thick, roundish but with many gentle ridges, the bark fibrous, pithy-hollow up 1"
between the nodes, the surface roughened by very short, stiff, appressed or leaning
hairs. Leaves palmately compound with typically 5-9 leaflets, sparse and widely spaced,
Escaped canna-
paired along the lower stem but alternate in the upper part. The uppermost leaves often
bis may be found
have only 3 leaflets. Leaflets sessile, narrowly lanceolate to nearly linear, long-tapered
almost any where
at the base and the pointed tip. The upper surface is roughened by sparse, appressed,
but hemp is often
needle-like hairs; the underside has denser, softer, almost woolly hair. Midvein incised,
an abundant
weed in the
as are the numerous secondary veins running at low angles; they protrude strongly below.
mapped area
Veinlets are flat and nearly invisible. Margins coarsely and evenly serrated with large,
sharp, forward-pointing teeth with claw tips. Stipules long-lanceolate, to 12 mm, sharp-tipped, soon browning.
Petiole about 60% of the longest leaflet, hairy, roundish with a deep, narrow groove. Inflorescence a large.
crowded, spike-like raceme interspersed with leaves at the branch tips. Flowers smail and unshowy, the female
ripening to produce small, hard, oval seeds 2-3 mm long; enclosed in small bracts.
CONFUSING PLANTS: leaves of some cinquefoils (Potentilla) are commonly confused with young hemp, but
they are usually soft-hairy and never produce tall stalks.
HABITAT: Roadsides. railroad tracks, pastures, and agricultural land with very rich soil. Introduced.
FOOD USE: Lean the tops of ripe plants (late summer or early fall) over a sled or wheel barrow and beat them
with a stick to dislodge the seeds. Or cut mature tops and dry them before beating the seeds out. Rub and win-
now (see 27) to separate the chaff
Seeds have an annoying shell that is
hard to remove, but can be roasted.
ground, and used in porridge, seed
butter, or added to baked goods.
COMMENTS: Certain cultivated
forms of this plant produce mari
juana, and it is therefore illegal to
gather or use in most areas, although
wild forms have little THC. Despite
attempts by the government to eradi-
cate the plant, wild hemp is still very
common in some areas, particularly
the western Corn Belt. It IS a highly
preferred food by pheasants and
doves. The seeds can be collected
very fast and are highly nutritious.
051
promium 1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED 13 Hemp 3 Cannabis sativa Cannabinaceae (Hemp family) pointed, QUICK CHECK: Tall, aromatic herb with palmately compound leaves with narrow, toothed leaflets with strongly depressed secondary veins. ID difficulty 9 1, DESCRIPTION: Weedy annual, aromatic, branching heavily in the but little if crowded. Stem straight, erect, prominent, reaching 5-16' (1.5-5 m) in open, height, to (2.5 cm) thick, roundish but with many gentle ridges, the bark fibrous, pithy-hollow up 1" between the nodes, the surface roughened by very short, stiff, appressed or leaning hairs. Leaves palmately compound with typically 5-9 leaflets, sparse and widely spaced, Escaped canna- paired along the lower stem but alternate in the upper part. The uppermost leaves often bis may be found have only 3 leaflets. Leaflets sessile, narrowly lanceolate to nearly linear, long-tapered almost any where at the base and the pointed tip. The upper surface is roughened by sparse, appressed, but hemp is often needle-like hairs; the underside has denser, softer, almost woolly hair. Midvein incised, an abundant weed in the as are the numerous secondary veins running at low angles; they protrude strongly below. mapped area Veinlets are flat and nearly invisible. Margins coarsely and evenly serrated with large, sharp, forward-pointing teeth with claw tips. Stipules long-lanceolate, to 12 mm, sharp-tipped, soon browning. Petiole about 60% of the longest leaflet, hairy, roundish with a deep, narrow groove. Inflorescence a large. crowded, spike-like raceme interspersed with leaves at the branch tips. Flowers smail and unshowy, the female ripening to produce small, hard, oval seeds 2-3 mm long; enclosed in small bracts. CONFUSING PLANTS: leaves of some cinquefoils (Potentilla) are commonly confused with young hemp, but they are usually soft-hairy and never produce tall stalks. HABITAT: Roadsides. railroad tracks, pastures, and agricultural land with very rich soil. Introduced. FOOD USE: Lean the tops of ripe plants (late summer or early fall) over a sled or wheel barrow and beat them with a stick to dislodge the seeds. Or cut mature tops and dry them before beating the seeds out. Rub and win- now (see 27) to separate the chaff Seeds have an annoying shell that is hard to remove, but can be roasted. ground, and used in porridge, seed butter, or added to baked goods. COMMENTS: Certain cultivated forms of this plant produce mari juana, and it is therefore illegal to gather or use in most areas, although wild forms have little THC. Despite attempts by the government to eradi- cate the plant, wild hemp is still very common in some areas, particularly the western Corn Belt. It IS a highly preferred food by pheasants and doves. The seeds can be collected very fast and are highly nutritious. 051 