BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
Prairie-turnip
3 []] IWE-282
14
Pediomelum esculentum
Fabaceae
(Bean
family)
Shin-high, bushy herb with very hairy stems; palmately compound with hairy
leaves QUICK with CHECK: 5 deeply folded, entire leaflets; flowers packed in a short raceme
bracts. ID difficulty 3.
Perennial herb with a strong turpentine-like smell, about as wide widen as 2-6" tall,
DESCRIPTION: back by late spring to mid summer and detaching as a tumbleweed. Roots cm) thick,
dying underground into turnip-like or elongated enlargements 1-2.5" (2.5-6
with single a but waxy, occasionally few, 6-16" (10-40 cm) tall, rigid, 2-4 mm thick, hollow, with a gentle at
(5-13 tough, dark outer skin that separates readily, and a long, cord-like taproot below. few Stems angles, usu-
densely ally covered with long, straight, stiff, erect hairs. Branches few or absent, mostly near the base, spread
wide angles. Leaves alternate but often borne very close together, palmately compound with 3-10 (usually
5) leaflets. Petioles 1-2 times the terminal leaflet length, weakly ascending, roundish with one or more small
grooves, often twisted, hairy. Stipules lanceolate, whitish on the lower half and green toward the tip and edge.
Leaflets elliptic, obovate, or oblanceolate, 0.7-2" (18-50 cm) long, strongly folded along the midvein, abruptly
pointed at both ends, the margins entire with long hairs. Surface glossy and hairless or nearly so on top, the
underside covered with whitish hairs pressed toward the tip. The midvein is light in color, depressed above and
projecting below. Secondary veins many, 45° to the midvein, inconspicuous and flat above. Inflorescence a
cylindrical, usually ascending, crowded, fluffy-looking raceme 1-2.8" (2.5-7 cm) long and 1" (2.5 cm) wide,
borne on an up-curved, hairy, hollow, proportionately thick peduncle to 4" (10 cm) long. The raceme is tightly
packed with ovate, hairy, ascending bracts, hiding the rachis and short pedicels. Flowers (late spring or early
summer) ascending, the calyx with 5 sharp lobes, 2 of them smaller and conjoined to the midpoint, with a
bulge on one side near the base. Corolla light blue-purple, pea-like with a large, rounded banner. Pods have a
single bean-like seed 4-6 mm long and a long. thin, hairy, sharp beak.
CONFUSING PLANTS: Some lupines have similar leaves, but the fruits and roots differ. Many members of
the genus Pediomelum (Psoralea) have smaller and tougher roots, which may also be bitter.
HABITAT: Dry prairies, sparse woodlands, lightly grazed lands, especially on slopes. Native.
FOOD USE: Dig roots whenever the tops are visible-best
as the tops finish blooming and begin to ripen seeds, so they
can be replanted with harvest. After peeling, the roots can
be eaten raw or cooked, sliced or diced or ground into flour.
They are easily stored by drying. Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: This is a fantastic staple food of the prai-
ries and the harvest remains a vibrant tradition for many
Indigenous people today. These roots are high in protein
and starch. They are delicious and hearty, great in stews.
AKA breadroot, tinpsila, Psoralea esculenta. The similar but
stemless small prairie-turnip is covered on page 300.
632
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED Prairie-turnip 3 []] IWE-282 14 Pediomelum esculentum Fabaceae (Bean family) Shin-high, bushy herb with very hairy stems; palmately compound with hairy leaves QUICK with CHECK: 5 deeply folded, entire leaflets; flowers packed in a short raceme bracts. ID difficulty 3. Perennial herb with a strong turpentine-like smell, about as wide widen as 2-6" tall, DESCRIPTION: back by late spring to mid summer and detaching as a tumbleweed. Roots cm) thick, dying underground into turnip-like or elongated enlargements 1-2.5" (2.5-6 with single a but waxy, occasionally few, 6-16" (10-40 cm) tall, rigid, 2-4 mm thick, hollow, with a gentle at (5-13 tough, dark outer skin that separates readily, and a long, cord-like taproot below. few Stems angles, usu- densely ally covered with long, straight, stiff, erect hairs. Branches few or absent, mostly near the base, spread wide angles. Leaves alternate but often borne very close together, palmately compound with 3-10 (usually 5) leaflets. Petioles 1-2 times the terminal leaflet length, weakly ascending, roundish with one or more small grooves, often twisted, hairy. Stipules lanceolate, whitish on the lower half and green toward the tip and edge. Leaflets elliptic, obovate, or oblanceolate, 0.7-2" (18-50 cm) long, strongly folded along the midvein, abruptly pointed at both ends, the margins entire with long hairs. Surface glossy and hairless or nearly so on top, the underside covered with whitish hairs pressed toward the tip. The midvein is light in color, depressed above and projecting below. Secondary veins many, 45° to the midvein, inconspicuous and flat above. Inflorescence a cylindrical, usually ascending, crowded, fluffy-looking raceme 1-2.8" (2.5-7 cm) long and 1" (2.5 cm) wide, borne on an up-curved, hairy, hollow, proportionately thick peduncle to 4" (10 cm) long. The raceme is tightly packed with ovate, hairy, ascending bracts, hiding the rachis and short pedicels. Flowers (late spring or early summer) ascending, the calyx with 5 sharp lobes, 2 of them smaller and conjoined to the midpoint, with a bulge on one side near the base. Corolla light blue-purple, pea-like with a large, rounded banner. Pods have a single bean-like seed 4-6 mm long and a long. thin, hairy, sharp beak. CONFUSING PLANTS: Some lupines have similar leaves, but the fruits and roots differ. Many members of the genus Pediomelum (Psoralea) have smaller and tougher roots, which may also be bitter. HABITAT: Dry prairies, sparse woodlands, lightly grazed lands, especially on slopes. Native. FOOD USE: Dig roots whenever the tops are visible-best as the tops finish blooming and begin to ripen seeds, so they can be replanted with harvest. After peeling, the roots can be eaten raw or cooked, sliced or diced or ground into flour. They are easily stored by drying. Conservation 3. COMMENTS: This is a fantastic staple food of the prai- ries and the harvest remains a vibrant tradition for many Indigenous people today. These roots are high in protein and starch. They are delicious and hearty, great in stews. AKA breadroot, tinpsila, Psoralea esculenta. The similar but stemless small prairie-turnip is covered on page 300. 632 