BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
16
Aralia Spikenard racemosa 3 Araliaceae (Ginseng family)
Large, wide-spreading herb with doubly clusters. compound ID difficulty leaves and 2. broad
leaflets; numerous herb from a semi-woody base, 2-6' (60-180 pockets cm) that tall
QUICK CHECK: small purple fruits in large branching
DESCRIPTION: Large perennial fibrous, and much branched with occasional substance.
and about and as wide. less Roots fibrous. thick, They are aromatic and contain at a the sticky, nodes, resinous upright but often
Stems are fleshy clumped, with to 1.2" widely (3 cm) spreading thick at branches, the base, the bulged surface sparsely hairy, and joined faintly into striped a light-colored and lightly ridged, fleshy
leaning, zigzag hairy; the lowest are enlarged covered with soft,
purple. Stipules erect, acuminate, nearly straight, sheathing, strongly tapered, leafy (not pointed) of shoots at the have tip, long, densely thick, erect petioles,
sheath. Shoots solid and light green inside. Leaves petiole. Shoot leaves are
white, curving hairs, purple-brown, the stem, which has its deepest groove on the side facing the and 2 or 3 times compound.
scarcely diverging folded, from ruffled, and very light green. Leaves few in number but large divides ternately, each
densely hairy, section, solid, not channeled. After 3-11" (8-28 the petiole 2-6" (5-15 cm) long,
division pinnately variable on the same leaf, heart-shaped to broadly ovate, sessile or with short petiolules
Petioles roundish in compound cross with 3-7 leaflets. Rachis branches are channeled. Leaflets (much
the size highly the terminal leaflet). The surface is faintly downy and ruffled. Veins above are broadly depressed.
Margins longer on sharply, densely, and usually doubly serrated. Each leaflet or rachis juncture has a light-colored enlarge-
ment often forming an X on the rachis. Inflorescence an
elongated panicle from a leaf axil, 4-26" (10-66 cm)
long, finely pubescent, with many branches bearing
numerous umbels of 14-18. Flowers (summer) tiny,
greenish-white, with 5 petals. Berries spherical, 3 mm,
dark purple, with 5 protruding bristles, a depressed
end, and a single seed.
HABITAT: Rich, well-drained soil in hardwood forests,
especially where rocky or gravelly, growing best in small
openings with a bit of sun, such as trailsides and forest
edges. Native.
FOOD USE: Roots were traditionally boiled for tea
and used in root beer, along with
sassafras. The thick shoots in
spring make an excellent and
interesting aromatic vegetable,
raw or cooked. The ripe berries
are sweet but also have a soapy
flavor reminiscent of sarsaparilla
(p. 290); they can be nibbled in
moderation and have been used
for wines, jellies, and liqueurs.
Conservation 3/2/1.
COMMENTS: This striking, dis-
tinctive herb is one of our larg-
est. I have seen individual berry
clusters weighing over a pound.
The flavor of the root is much
stronger than that of its better-
known cousin, sarsaparilla (Ara-
lia nudicaulis). The shoots are a
little-known exotic delicacy.
Aralia racemosa shoots
654
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED 16 Aralia Spikenard racemosa 3 Araliaceae (Ginseng family) Large, wide-spreading herb with doubly clusters. compound ID difficulty leaves and 2. broad leaflets; numerous herb from a semi-woody base, 2-6' (60-180 pockets cm) that tall QUICK CHECK: small purple fruits in large branching DESCRIPTION: Large perennial fibrous, and much branched with occasional substance. and about and as wide. less Roots fibrous. thick, They are aromatic and contain at a the sticky, nodes, resinous upright but often Stems are fleshy clumped, with to 1.2" widely (3 cm) spreading thick at branches, the base, the bulged surface sparsely hairy, and joined faintly into striped a light-colored and lightly ridged, fleshy leaning, zigzag hairy; the lowest are enlarged covered with soft, purple. Stipules erect, acuminate, nearly straight, sheathing, strongly tapered, leafy (not pointed) of shoots at the have tip, long, densely thick, erect petioles, sheath. Shoots solid and light green inside. Leaves petiole. Shoot leaves are white, curving hairs, purple-brown, the stem, which has its deepest groove on the side facing the and 2 or 3 times compound. scarcely diverging folded, from ruffled, and very light green. Leaves few in number but large divides ternately, each densely hairy, section, solid, not channeled. After 3-11" (8-28 the petiole 2-6" (5-15 cm) long, division pinnately variable on the same leaf, heart-shaped to broadly ovate, sessile or with short petiolules Petioles roundish in compound cross with 3-7 leaflets. Rachis branches are channeled. Leaflets (much the size highly the terminal leaflet). The surface is faintly downy and ruffled. Veins above are broadly depressed. Margins longer on sharply, densely, and usually doubly serrated. Each leaflet or rachis juncture has a light-colored enlarge- ment often forming an X on the rachis. Inflorescence an elongated panicle from a leaf axil, 4-26" (10-66 cm) long, finely pubescent, with many branches bearing numerous umbels of 14-18. Flowers (summer) tiny, greenish-white, with 5 petals. Berries spherical, 3 mm, dark purple, with 5 protruding bristles, a depressed end, and a single seed. HABITAT: Rich, well-drained soil in hardwood forests, especially where rocky or gravelly, growing best in small openings with a bit of sun, such as trailsides and forest edges. Native. FOOD USE: Roots were traditionally boiled for tea and used in root beer, along with sassafras. The thick shoots in spring make an excellent and interesting aromatic vegetable, raw or cooked. The ripe berries are sweet but also have a soapy flavor reminiscent of sarsaparilla (p. 290); they can be nibbled in moderation and have been used for wines, jellies, and liqueurs. Conservation 3/2/1. COMMENTS: This striking, dis- tinctive herb is one of our larg- est. I have seen individual berry clusters weighing over a pound. The flavor of the root is much stronger than that of its better- known cousin, sarsaparilla (Ara- lia nudicaulis). The shoots are a little-known exotic delicacy. Aralia racemosa shoots 654 