1cm
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
15 Tall breadroot
1
Pediomelum cuspidatum Fabaceae (Bean family)
QUICK 5 entire, CHECK: Leaning, lanky, hairy, knee-high plant; leaves compound with
shiny leaflets; bluish flowers in a tight cluster. ID difficulty palmately 3.
DESCRIPTION: elongated, Perennial, the form lanky and longer than wide. Taproot
narrow at the top, tapering to both ends, widest in the middle, enlarged the and
portion rind 6-14" (15-36 cm) long, the surface brown and flaky outside with whitish enlarged flesh
a that readily peels. Stems one to few, 10-34" (25-86 cm) long and 3-6 mm thick, and
almost always strongly leaning or even lying on the ground, simple or branched, roundish but with faint
sparsely covered with curvy and leaning to appressed hairs, usually maroon on the sunny side and grooves, toward
the ground. Leaves alternate, often widely spaced, palmately compound, most with 5 leaflets, green all sessile.
Petioles 40-70% of the longer leaflet length. Stipules linear, 7-11 mm long. Leaflets elliptic to obovate, 1-2.5"
(2.5-6 cm) long, creased and often folded along the midvein, the bases acute and the tips acute to rounded
with a claw. Surface semi-glossy and hairless or nearly so above; the underside has scattered, appressed hair.
Midvein depressed above and protruding below; secondary veins are faint, nearly flat above and below. Inflores-
cence a densely packed, spike-like raceme 1.5-3.5" (4-9 cm) long with very short pedicels. Flowers (late spring to
early summer) tubular, pea-like, 0.5-0.7" (13-18 mm) long, the calyx lobes unequal (the lowest is longest) with long
acuminate tips. Corolla purple-
blue and pea-like. Pods 6-7 mm
long, enclosed in the inflated,
persistent calyx, which turns dull
yellowish.
HABITAT: Well-drained,
rocky, short-grass or mixed
prairies. Native. X
FOOD USE: The root can be
dug at any time but is best
early or late in the growing sea-
son, or under old, dead stems.
It is quite deep. The flesh is
very bitter when raw, but this
can be eliminated by slicing
and then boiling and draining
off the water, after which it is
pretty good. Conservation 3.
COMMENTS: If you get past
the initial bitterness, this root
has a coconut-like aftertaste
that grows on you. Books often
call it "tall-bread scurf-pea,"
with the hyphens arranged just
like that, which seems to sug-
gest that it can be used to make
"tall bread," which is perhaps
an alternative to short-bread,
which is pretty darn good with
strawberries on top. Oh wait,
that's cake. Forget it-l have
noidea what that name means
Root the stem end
is on the right
653
1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED 15 Tall breadroot 1 Pediomelum cuspidatum Fabaceae (Bean family) QUICK 5 entire, CHECK: Leaning, lanky, hairy, knee-high plant; leaves compound with shiny leaflets; bluish flowers in a tight cluster. ID difficulty palmately 3. DESCRIPTION: elongated, Perennial, the form lanky and longer than wide. Taproot narrow at the top, tapering to both ends, widest in the middle, enlarged the and portion rind 6-14" (15-36 cm) long, the surface brown and flaky outside with whitish enlarged flesh a that readily peels. Stems one to few, 10-34" (25-86 cm) long and 3-6 mm thick, and almost always strongly leaning or even lying on the ground, simple or branched, roundish but with faint sparsely covered with curvy and leaning to appressed hairs, usually maroon on the sunny side and grooves, toward the ground. Leaves alternate, often widely spaced, palmately compound, most with 5 leaflets, green all sessile. Petioles 40-70% of the longer leaflet length. Stipules linear, 7-11 mm long. Leaflets elliptic to obovate, 1-2.5" (2.5-6 cm) long, creased and often folded along the midvein, the bases acute and the tips acute to rounded with a claw. Surface semi-glossy and hairless or nearly so above; the underside has scattered, appressed hair. Midvein depressed above and protruding below; secondary veins are faint, nearly flat above and below. Inflores- cence a densely packed, spike-like raceme 1.5-3.5" (4-9 cm) long with very short pedicels. Flowers (late spring to early summer) tubular, pea-like, 0.5-0.7" (13-18 mm) long, the calyx lobes unequal (the lowest is longest) with long acuminate tips. Corolla purple- blue and pea-like. Pods 6-7 mm long, enclosed in the inflated, persistent calyx, which turns dull yellowish. HABITAT: Well-drained, rocky, short-grass or mixed prairies. Native. X FOOD USE: The root can be dug at any time but is best early or late in the growing sea- son, or under old, dead stems. It is quite deep. The flesh is very bitter when raw, but this can be eliminated by slicing and then boiling and draining off the water, after which it is pretty good. Conservation 3. COMMENTS: If you get past the initial bitterness, this root has a coconut-like aftertaste that grows on you. Books often call it "tall-bread scurf-pea," with the hyphens arranged just like that, which seems to sug- gest that it can be used to make "tall bread," which is perhaps an alternative to short-bread, which is pretty darn good with strawberries on top. Oh wait, that's cake. Forget it-l have noidea what that name means Root the stem end is on the right 653 