1cm
BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED
17 Bristly sarsaparilla
Aralia hispida Araliaceae (Ginseng family)
QUICK folded, CHECK: Robust plant with a woody base
sessile leaflets; umbels of tiny flowers and berries and thick, ID difficulty prickly
DESCRIPTION: but occasionally Perennial herb, woody at the base, the woody 2.
1" (2.5 cm) thick, as much as 2' (60 cm) tall (in which case it would portion key as usually a a few inches
branches vertical. single Bark or multiple from the base, often branching close to shrub), the Stems to
erratic variations of the woody portion gray-brown with raised ground, all
(60-180 cm) in thickness, and a few bristles. Herbaceous growth rings around the stem,
base of the herbaceous tall, the stems round and smooth but for scattered bristles. very Leaves light green, alternate. 2-6 borne
Petiole/rachis portion, widely spaced above this, 9-16" (23-46 cm) long and 2 or densely at the
parts. After bristly with a small sheath at the base, green to reddish, rounded, 3 times compound.
enlarged. Rachis 3-7" (8-18 cm) the rachis splits 3 ways; 2 leaflets attach at this juncture; grooved rachis only in the thinnest
sile, branches are pinnately compound with 5-9 leaflets, some of them clustered. junctures are
major ovate, veins curved downward, folded along the midvein, 1.5-3.5" (4-9 cm) long, mostly nairless Leaflets ses-
depressed above and protruding below. Inflorescence a loosely branching terminal cluster of umbels green, (or
below; the margins are coarsely and irregularly toothed with occasional lobes. Veins except light along
sloppy compound umbel), the peduncles 4-10" (10-25 cm) long, the branches naked except for scattered a
bracts. Umbels rounded with up to 90 straw-colored rays 1-1.5" (25-38 mm) long. Flowers (early summer)
3-5 mm across with 5 reflexed creamy petals with a prominent central vein and an incurved. pointed tip; there
are 5 protruding stamens. The calyx is a light green cup with 5 teeth on the rim. Berries spherical. 3-4 mm
across, ripening in late summer to purple-black.
HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny sites on poor sandy, gravelly, or rocky soil. Most common along roads and after
burns or logging; also riverbanks and cliffs. Native.
FOOD USE: Tender shoots in late spring can be used as a vegetable after peeling, raw or cookec. The flavor
is strong and almost spicy. Conservation 2.
COMMENTS: This unusual plant straddles the fence between an herb and a shrub. Uist it here because the
woody base is not immediately or always evident. The shoots are smaller than those of A. spinosa (p. 98) but
the flavor is similar.
055
Aralia hispida shoot
1cm BASAL LEAVES ABSENT, LEAVES ALTERNATE AND COMPOUND OR DIVIDED 17 Bristly sarsaparilla Aralia hispida Araliaceae (Ginseng family) QUICK folded, CHECK: Robust plant with a woody base sessile leaflets; umbels of tiny flowers and berries and thick, ID difficulty prickly DESCRIPTION: but occasionally Perennial herb, woody at the base, the woody 2. 1" (2.5 cm) thick, as much as 2' (60 cm) tall (in which case it would portion key as usually a a few inches branches vertical. single Bark or multiple from the base, often branching close to shrub), the Stems to erratic variations of the woody portion gray-brown with raised ground, all (60-180 cm) in thickness, and a few bristles. Herbaceous growth rings around the stem, base of the herbaceous tall, the stems round and smooth but for scattered bristles. very Leaves light green, alternate. 2-6 borne Petiole/rachis portion, widely spaced above this, 9-16" (23-46 cm) long and 2 or densely at the parts. After bristly with a small sheath at the base, green to reddish, rounded, 3 times compound. enlarged. Rachis 3-7" (8-18 cm) the rachis splits 3 ways; 2 leaflets attach at this juncture; grooved rachis only in the thinnest sile, branches are pinnately compound with 5-9 leaflets, some of them clustered. junctures are major ovate, veins curved downward, folded along the midvein, 1.5-3.5" (4-9 cm) long, mostly nairless Leaflets ses- depressed above and protruding below. Inflorescence a loosely branching terminal cluster of umbels green, (or below; the margins are coarsely and irregularly toothed with occasional lobes. Veins except light along sloppy compound umbel), the peduncles 4-10" (10-25 cm) long, the branches naked except for scattered a bracts. Umbels rounded with up to 90 straw-colored rays 1-1.5" (25-38 mm) long. Flowers (early summer) 3-5 mm across with 5 reflexed creamy petals with a prominent central vein and an incurved. pointed tip; there are 5 protruding stamens. The calyx is a light green cup with 5 teeth on the rim. Berries spherical. 3-4 mm across, ripening in late summer to purple-black. HABITAT: Disturbed, sunny sites on poor sandy, gravelly, or rocky soil. Most common along roads and after burns or logging; also riverbanks and cliffs. Native. FOOD USE: Tender shoots in late spring can be used as a vegetable after peeling, raw or cookec. The flavor is strong and almost spicy. Conservation 2. COMMENTS: This unusual plant straddles the fence between an herb and a shrub. Uist it here because the woody base is not immediately or always evident. The shoots are smaller than those of A. spinosa (p. 98) but the flavor is similar. 055 Aralia hispida shoot 